APASTAMBA PRASNA I, PATALA 10, KHANDA 28.
Hindu Index  Index  Previous  Next  

1. He who, under any conditions whatsoever, covets (and takes) another man's possessions is a thief; thus (teach) Katitsa and Harita as well as Kanva and Pushkarasadi.
2. Varshyayani declares, that there are exceptions to this law, in regard to some possessions.
3. (E.g.) seeds ripening in the pod, food for a draught-ox; (if these are taken), the owners (ought) not (to) forbid it.
4. To take even these things in too great a quantity is sinful.
5. Harita declares, that in every case the permission (of the owner must be obtained) first.
6. He shall not go to visit a fallen teacher or blood relation.
7. Nor shall he accept the (means for procuring) enjoyments from such a person.
8. If he meets them accidentally he shall silently embrace (their feet) and pass on.
9. A mother does very many acts for her son, therefore he must constantly serve her, though she be fallen.
10. But (there shall be) no communion (with a fallen mother) in acts performed for the acquisition of spiritual merit.
[28. 3. The same rule. Manu emphatically ascribes to himself, Manu VIII, 339, But see also VIII, 331.
7. Haradatta remarks, that this Sutra implicitly forbids to accept the heritage of an outcast.]
11. Enjoyments taken unrighteously he shall give up; he shall say, 'I and sin (do not dwell together).' Clothing himself with a garment reaching from the navel down to the knee, bathing daily, morn, noon, and evening, eating food which contains neither milk nor pungent condiments, nor salt, he shall not enter a house for twelve years.
12. After that he (may be) purified.
13. Then he may have intercourse with Aryans.
14. This penance may also be employed in the case of the other crimes which cause loss of caste (for which no penance has been ordained above).
15. But the violator of a Guru's bed shall enter a hollow iron image and, hhving caused a fire to be lit on both sides, he shall burn himself.
16. According to Harita, this (last-mentioned penance must) not (be performed).
17, For he who takes his own or another's life becomes an Abhisasta.
18. He (the violator of a Guru's bed) shall perform to his last breath (the penance) prescribed by that rule (Sutra 11). He cannot be purified in this world. But (after death) his sin is taken away.
19. He who has unjustly forsaken his wife shall put on an ass's skin, with the hair turned outside, and beg in seven houses, saying, 'Give alms to him who forsook his wife.' That shall be his livelihood for six months.
20. But if a wife forsakes her husband, she shall
[11. A similar but easier penance is prescribed, Manu XI, 19 4.
15. 1 (This penance, which had been prescribed above, I, 9, 25, 1), is enjoined (once more), in order to show that it is not optional (as might be expected according to Sutra 14).'-Haradatta.]
perform the twelve-night Krikkhra penance for as long a time.
21. He who has killed a Bhruna (a man learned in the Vedas and Vedangas and skilled in the performance of the rites) shall put on the skin of a dog or of an ass, with the hair turned outside, and take a human skull for his drinking-vessel,
