APASTAMBA PRASNA II, PATALA 8, KHANDA 20.
Hindu Index  Index  Previous  Next  

1. At,every monthly Sraddha he shall use, in whatever manner he may be able, one drona of sesarnum.
2. And he shall feed Brahmanas endowed with all (good qualities), and they shall not give the fragments (of the food) to a person who does not possess the same good qualities (as the Brahmanas).
3. He who desires prosperity shall fast in the half of the year when the sun goes to the north, under the constellation Tishya, in the first half of the month, for (a day and) a night at least, prepare a Sthalipaka-offering, offer burnt-oblations to Kubera (the god of riches), feed a Brahmana with that (food prepared for the Sthalipaka) mixed with clarified butter, and make him wish prosperity with (a Mantra) implying prosperity.
4. This (rite he shall repeat) daily until the next Tishya(-day).
5. On the second (Tishya-day and during the second month he shall feed) two (Brahmanas).
6. On the third (Tishya-day and during the third month he shall feed) three (Brahmanas).
7. In this manner (the Tishya-rite is to be performed) for a year, with a (monthly) increase (of the number of Brahmanas fed).
[20. 1. A drona equals 128 seers or seras. The latter is variously reckoned at 1-3 lbs.
3. The reason why the constellation Tishya has been chosen for this rite seems to be that Tishya has another name, Pushya, i.e. 'prosperous'. This sacrifice is to begin on the Tishya-day of the month called Taisha or Pausba (December-January), and to continue for one year.]
8. (Thus) he obtains great prosperity.
9. But the fasting takes place on the first (Tishya-day) only.
10. He shall avoid to eat those things which have lost their strength (as butter-milk, curds, and whey).
11. He shall avoid to tread on ashes or husks of grain.
12. To wash one foot with the other, or to place one foot on the other,
13. And to swing his feet,
14. And to place one leg crosswise over the knee (of the other),
15. And to make his nails
16. Or to make (his finger-joints) crack without a (good) reason,
17. And all other (acts) which they blame.
18. And let him acquire money in all ways that are lawful.
19. And let him spend money on worthy (persons or objects).
20. And let him not give anything to an unworthy (person), of whom he does not stand in fear.
21. And let him conciliate men (by gifts or kindness).
22. And he may enjoy the pleasures which are not forbidden by the holy law.
23. (Acting) thus he conquers both worlds.
[11. Manu IV, 7 8.
16. 'Good reasons for cracking the joints are fatigue or rheumatism.'--Haradatta.
19. Manu XI, 6, and passim.]
