APASTAMBA PRASNA II, PATALA 8, KHANDA 19.
Hindu Index  Index  Previous  Next  

1. Shall cause to be prepared powder of white mustard-seeds, cause his hands, feet, ears, and mouth to be rubbed with that, and shall eat (the remainder). If the wind does not blow too violently, he shall eat sitting, silent and his face turned towards the south, on a seat (facing the) same (direction)the first alternative is the skin of a he-goat.
2. But they declare, that the life of the mother of that person who eats at this ceremony, his face turned in that direction, will be shortened.
3. A vessel of brass, the centre of which is gilt, is best (for this occasion).
4. And nobody else shall eat out of that vessel.
5. He shall make a lump of as much (food) as he can swallow (at once).
6. (And he shall) not scatter anything (on the ground).
7. He shall not let go the vessel (with his left hand);
8. Or he may let it go.
[19. 1. The ceremony which is here described, may also be performed daily. If the reading prasya is adopted, the translation must run thus: 'and he shall scatter (the remainder of the powder). If the wind,' &c.
2. 'Therefore those whose mothers are alive should not perform this ceremony.'--Haradatta.
4. If the masculine bhoktavyah is used instead of bhoktavyam, the participle must be construed with kamasah.
5. The verbum finitum, which according to the Sanskrit text ought to be taken with the participle samnayan, is grasita, Sutra 9.
8. 'Why is this second alternative mentioned, as (the first Sutra) suffices? True. But according to the maxim that "restrictions are made on account of the continuance of an action once begun," the meaning of this second Sutra is that he shall continue to the end to handle the vessel (in that manner in which) he has handled it when eating for the first time.'--Haradatta.]
9. He shall swallow the whole mouthful at once, introducing it, together with the thumb, (into the mouth.)
10. He shall make no noise with his mouth (whilst eating).
11. And he shall not shake his right hand (whilst eating).
12. After he (has eaten and) sipped water, he shall raise his hands, until the water has run off (and they have become dry).
13. After that he shall touch fire.
14. And (during this ceremony) he shall not eat in the day-time anything but roots and fruit.
15. And let him avoid Sthalipaka-offerings, and food offered to the Manes or to the Gods.
16. He shall eat wearing his upper garment over his left shoulder and under his right arm.
17. At the (monthly) Sraddha which must necessardy be performed, he must use (food) mixed with fat.
18. The first (and preferable) alternative (is to employ) clarified butter and meat.
19. On failure (of these), oil of sesamum, vegetables, and (similar materials may be used).
20. And under the asterism Magha he shall feed the Brahmanas more (than at other times) with (food mixed with) clarified butter, according to the rule of the Sraddha.
[16. Haradatta remarks that some allow, according to II, 2, 4, 22, the sacred thread to be substituted, and others think that both the thread and the garment should be worn over the left shoulder and under the right arm.]
