APASTAMBA PRASNA I, PATALA 9, KHANDA 27.
Hindu Index  Index  Previous  Next  

1. After having eaten sesamum or having fasted on the full moon day of the month Sravana July-August), he may on the following day bathe in the water of a great river and offer (a burnt-oblation of) one thousand pieces of sacred fuel, whilst. reciting the Gayatri, or he may mutter (the Gayatri) as many times.
2. Or he may perform Ishtis and Soma-sacrifices for the sake of purifying himself (from his sins),
3. After having eaten forbidden food, he must fast, until his entrails are empty.
4. That is (generally) attained after seven days.
5. Or he may during winter and during the dewy
[27. 1. 'The oblations of sacred fuel (samidh) are not to be accompanied by the exclamation Svaha'--Haradatta.
2. Ishtis are the simplest forms of the Srauta-sacrifices, i.e. of those for which three fires are necessary.
3. For some particular kinds of forbidden food the same penance is prescribed, Manu XI, 153-154.]
season (November-March) bathe in cold water both morning and evening.
6. Or he may perform a Krikkhra penance, which lasts twelve days.
7. The rule for the Krikkhra penance of twelve days (is the following): For three days he must not eat in the evening, and then for three days not in the morning; for three days he must live on food which has been given unasked, and three days he must not eat anything.
8. If he repeats this for a year, that is called a Krikkhra penance, which lasts for a year.
9. Now follows another penance. He who has committed even a great many sins which do not cause him to fall, becomes free from guilt, if, fasting, he recites the entire Sakha of his Veda three times consecutively.
10. He who cohabits with a non-Aryan woman, he who lends money at interest, he who drinks (other) spirituous liquors (than Sura), he who praises everybody in a manner unworthy of a Brahmana, shall sit on grass, allowing his back to be scorched (by the sun).
11. A Brahmana removes the sin which he committed by serving one day and night (a man of) the black race, if he bathes for three years, eating at every fourth meal-time.
[7. The same penance is described, under the name Pragapatya krikkhra, the Krihkhra invented by Pragapati, Manu XI, 212, and Yagn. III, 320.
9. Manu XI, 259.
11. The expression krishna varna, 'the black race,' is truly Vedic. In the Rig-veda it usually denotes the aboriginal races, and sometimes the demons. Others explain the Sutra thus: A Bramana removes the sin, which be committed by cohabiting for one night with a female of the Sudra caste, &c.--Haradatta. The latter explanation has been adopted by Kulluka on Manu XI. 179.]
