SURA LXXII (72) - Djinn    (Mecca - 28 Verses)             (LXII - 140)      
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       Say:  It hath been revealed to me that a company of Djinn listened, and
said, - "Verily, we have heard a marvellous discourse (Koran);
 
       It guideth to the truth; wherefore we believed in it, and we will not
henceforth join any being with our Lord;
 
       And He, - may the majesty of our Lord be exalted! - hath taken no spouse
neither hath he any offspring.
 
       But the foolish among us hath spoken of God that which is unjust:
 
       And we verily thought that no one amongst men or Djinn would have
uttered a lie against God.
 
       There are indeed people among men, who have sought for refuge unto
people among Djinn: but they only increased their folly:
 
       And they thought, as ye think, that God would not raise any from the
dead.
 
       And the Heavens did we essay, but found them filled with a mighty
garrison, and with flaming darts;
 
       And we sat on the some of the seats to listen, but whoever listeneth
findeth an ambush ready for him of flaming darts.
 
72:10  And truly we know not whether evil be meant for them that are on earth,
or whether their Lord meaneth guidance for them.
 
       And there are among us good, and others among us of another kind; - we
are of various sorts:
 
       And verily we thought that no one could weaken God on earth, neither
could we escape from him by flight:
 
       Wherefore as soon as we had heard 'the guidance' we believed in it; and
whoever believeth in his Lord, need not fear either loss or wrong.
 
       There are some among us who have resigned themselves to God (the
Muslims); and there are others of us who have gone astray.  And whoso resigneth
himself to God pursueth the way of truth;
 
       But they who go astray from it shall be fuel for Hell."
 
       Moreover, if they (the Meccans) keep straight on in that way, we will
surely give them to drink of abundant waters,
 
       That we may prove them thereby: but whoso withdraweth from the
remembrance of his Lord, him will He send into a severe torment.
 
       It is unto God that the temples are set apart:  call not then on any
other therein with God.
 
       When the servant of God stood up to call upon Him, the djinn almost
jostled him by their crowds.
 
72:20  Say:  I call only upon my Lord, and I join no other being with Him.
 
       Say:  No control have I over what may hurt or benefit you.
 
       Say:  Verily none can protect me against God;
 
       Neither shall I find any refuge beside Him.
 
       My sole work is preaching from God, and His message:  and for such as
shall rebel against God and his apostle is the fire of Hell! they shall remain
therein alway, - for ever!
 
       Until they see their threatened vengeance they will be perverse! but
then shall they know which side was the weakest in a protector and the fewest
in number.
 
       Say:  I know not whether that with which ye are threatened be night, or
whether my Lord hath assigned it to a distant day:  He knoweth the secret, nor
doth He divulge his secret to any,
 
       Except to that Apostle who pleaseth Him; and before him and behind him
He maketh a guard to march:
 
       That He may know if his Apostles have verily delivered the messages of
their Lord: and He embraceth in his knowledge all their ways, and taketh count
of all that concerneth them.
 
