SURA LIV (54) - The Moon         Mecca - 55 verses           (XLIX - 76)      
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       The hour hath approached and the moon hath been cleft:
 
       But whenever they see a miracle they turn aside and say, This is
well-devised magic.
 
       And they have treated the prophets as impostors, and follow their own
lusts; but everything is unalterably fixed.
 
       A message of prohibition had come to them -
 
       Consummate wisdom - but warners profit them not.
 
       Quit them then.  On the day when the summoner shall summon to a stern
business,
 
       With downcast eyes shall they come forth from their graves, as if they
were scattered locusts,
 
       Hastening to the summoner.  "This," shall the infidels say, "is the
distressful day."
 
       Before them the people of Noah treated the truth as a lie.  Our servant
did they charge with falsehood, and said, "Demoniac!" and he was rejected.
 
54:10  Then cried he to his Lord, "Verily, they prevail against me; come thou
therefore to my succour."
 
       So we opened the gates of Heaven with water which fell in torrents,
 
       And we caused the earth to break forth with springs, and their waters
met by settled decree.
 
       And we bare him on a vessel made with planks and nails.
 
       Under our eyes it floated on: a recompence to him who had been rejected
with unbelief.
 
       And we left it a sign: but, is there any one who receives the warning?
 
       And how great was my vengeance and my menace!
 
       Easy for warning have we made the Koran - but, is there any one who
receives the warning?
 
       The Adites called the truth a lie: but how great was my vengeance and my
menace;
 
       For we sent against them a roaring wind in a day of continued distress:
 
54:20  It tore men away as though they were uprooted palm stumps.
 
       And how great was my vengeance and my menace!
 
       Easy for warning have we made the Koran - but, is there any one who
receives the warning?
 
       The tribe of Themoud treated the threatenings as lies:
 
       And they said, "Shall we follow a single man from among ourselves?  Then
verily should we be in error and in folly.
 
       To him alone among us is the office of warning entrusted?  No! he is an
impostor, an insolent person."
 
       To-morrow shall they learn who is the impostor, the insolent.
 
       "For we will send the she-camel to prove them: do thou mark them well,
O Saleh, and be patient:
 
       And fortell them that their waters shall be divided between themselves
and her, and that every draught shall come by turns to them."
 
       But they called to their comrade, and he took a knife and ham-strung
her.
 
54:30  And how great was my vengeance and my menace!
 
       We sent against them a single shout; and they became like the dry sticks
of the fold-builders.
 
       Easy have we made the Koran for warning - but, is there any one who
receives the warning?
 
       The people of Lot treated his warning as a lie;
 
       But we sent a stone-charged wind against them all, except the family of
Lot, whom at daybreak we delivered,
 
       By our special grace - for thus we reward the thankful.
 
       He, indeed, had warned them of our severity, but of that warning they
doubted.
 
       Even this guess did they demand: therefore we deprived them of sight,
 
       And said, "Taste ye my vengeance and my menace;"
 
       And in the morning a relentless punishment overtook them.
 
54:40  Easy have we made the Koran for warning - but, is there any one who
receives the warning?
 
       To the peoples of Pharaoh also came the threatenings:
 
       All our miracles did they treat as impostures.  Therefore seized we them
as he only can seize, who is the Mighty, the Strong.
 
       Are your infidels, O Meccans, better men that these?  Is there an
exemption for you in the sacred Books?
 
       Will they say, "We are a host that lend one another aid?"
 
       The host shall be routed, and they shall turn them back.
 
       But, that Hour is their threatened time, and that Hour shall be most
severe and bitter.
 
       Verily, the wicked are sunk in bewilderment and folly.
 
       On that day they shall be dragged into the fire on their faces.  "Taste
ye the touch of Hell."
 
       All things have we created after a fixed decree:
 
54:50  Our command was but one word, swift as the twinkling of an eye,
 
       Of old, too, have we destroyed the like of you - yet is any one warned?
 
       And everything that they do is in the Books;
 
       Each action, both small and great, is written down.
 
       Verily, amid gardens and rivers shall the pious dwell.
 
       In the seat of truth, in the presence of the potent King.
 
 
