SURA XXXI (31) - LOKMAN       (Mecca - 34 Verses)             (LXXXII - 267)
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       Elif. Lam. Mim.  These are the verses (signs) of the wise Book,
 
       A guidance and a mercy to the righteous,
 
       Who observe prayer, and pay the impost, and believe firmly in the life
to come: -
 
       These rest on guidance from their Lord, and with these it shall be well.
 
       But a man there is who buyeth an idle tale, that in his lack of
knowledge he may mislead others form the way of God, and turn it to scorn. For
such is prepared a shameful punishment!
 
       And when our signs are rehearsed to him, he turneth away disdainfully,
as though he heard them not, - as though his ears were heavy with deafness.
Announce to him therefore tidings of an afflictive punishment!
 
       But they who shall have believed and wrought good works, shall enjoy the
gardens of delight:
 
       For ever shall they dwell therein:  it is God's true promise! and He is
the Mighty, the Wise.
 
       Without pillars that can be seen hath He created the heavens, and on the
earth hath thrown mountains lest it should move with you; and He hath scattered
over it animals of every sort: and from the Heaven we send down rain and cause
every kind of noble plant to grow up therein.
 
31:10  This is the creation of God:  Shew me now what others than He have
created.  Ah! the ungodly are in a manifest delusion.
 
       Of old we bestowed wisdom upon Lokman, and taught him thus - "Be
thankful to God:  for whoever is thankful, is thankful to his own behoof; and
if any shall be thankless... God truly is self-sufficient, worthy of all
praise!"
 
      And bear in mind when Lokman said to his son by way of warning, "O my
son!  joint not others gods with God, for the joining gods with God is the
great impiety."
 
       (We have commanded man concerning his parents.  His mother carrieth him
with weakness upon weakness; nor until after two years is he weaned.  Be
grateful to me, and to thy parents.  Unto me shall all come.
 
       But if they importune thee to join that with Me of which thou hast no
knowledge, obey them not:  comport thyself towards them in this world as is
meet and right; but follow the way of him who turneth unto me.  Until me shall
ye return at last, and then will I tell you of your doings;)
 
       "O my son! verily God will bring everything to light, though it were but
the weight of a grain of mustard-seed, and hidden in a rock or in the heavens
or in the earth; for, God is subtile, informed of all.
 
       O my son! observe prayer, and enjoin the right and forbid the wrong, and
be patient under whatever shall betide thee: for this is a bounden duty.
 
       And distort not thy face at men; nor walk thou loftily on the earth; for
God loveth no arrogant vain-glorious one.
 
       But let thy pace be middling; and lower thy voice: for the least
pleasing of voices is surely the voice of asses."
 
       See ye not how that God hath put under you all that is in the heavens
and all that is on the earth, and hath been bounteous to you of his favours,
both for soul and body.  But some are there who dispute of God without
knowledge, and have no guidance and no illuminating Book:
 
31:20  And when it is said to them, Follow ye what God hath sent down, they
say, "Nay; that religion in which we found our fathers will we follow."  What!
though Satan bid them to the torment of the flame?
 
       But whoso setteth his face toward God with self-surrender, and is a doer
of that which is good, hath laid hold on a sure handle; for unto God is the
issue of all things.
 
       But let not the unbelief of the unbelieving grieve thee: unto us shall
they return: then will we tell them of their doings; for God knoweth the very
secrets of the breast.
 
       Yet a little while will we provide for them: afterwards will we force
them to a stern punishment.
 
       If thou ask them who hath created the heavens and the earth, they will
certainly reply, "God."  Say:  God be praised!  But most of them have no
knowledge.
 
       God's, whatever is in the Heavens and the Earth! for God, He is the
Rich, the Praiseworthy.
 
       If all the trees that are upon the earth were to become pens, and if God
should after that swell the sea into seven seas of ink, His words would not be
exhausted: for God is Mighty, Wise.
 
       Your creation and your quickening hereafter, are but as those of a
single individual.  Verily, God Heareth, Seeth!
 
       Seest thou not that God causeth the night to come in upon the day, and
the day to come in upon the night?  and that he hath subjected the sun and the
moon to laws by which each speedeth along to an appointed goal?  and that God
therefore is acquainted with that which ye do?

 
       This, for that God is the truth; and that whatever ye call upon beside
Him is a vain thing; and that God - He is the High, the Great.
 
31:30  Seest thou not how the ships speed on in the sea, through the favour
of God, that he may shew you of his signs? for herein are signs to all patient,
grateful ones.
 
       When the waves cover them like dark shadows they call upon God as with
sincere religion; but when He safely landeth them, some of them there are who
halt between two opinions.  Yet none reject our signs but all deceitful,
ungrateful ones.
 
       O men! fear ye your Lord, and dread the day whereon father shall not
atone for son, neither shall a son in the least atone for his father.
 
       Aye! the promise of God is a truth.  Let not this present life then
deceive you; neither let the deceiver deceive you concerning God.
 
       Aye!  God!  - with Him is the knowledge of the Hour; and He sendeth down
the rain - and He knoweth what is in the wombs - but no soul knoweth what it
shall have gotten on the morrow:  neither knoweth any soul in what land it
shall die.  But God is knowing, informed of all.
 
