SURA LXXVI (76) - Man      (Mecca - 31 Verses)                 (LII - 87)      
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       Doth not a long time pass over Man, during which he is a thing
unremembered?
 
       We have created man from the union of the sexes that we might prove him;
and hearing, seeing, have we made him:
 
       In a right way have we guided him, be he thankful or ungrateful.
 
       For the Infidels we have got ready chains and collars and flaming fire.
 
       But a wine cup tempered at the camphor fountain the just shall quaff:
 
       Fount whence the servants of God shall drink, and guide by channels from
place to place;
 
       They who fulfilled their vows, and feared the day whose woes will spread
fare and wide;
 
       Who thought longing for it themselves, bestowed their food on the poor
and the orphan and the captive:
 
       "We feed you for the sake of God: we seek from you neither recompense or
thanks:
 
76:10  A stern and calamitous day dread we from our Lord."
 
       From the evil therefore of that day hath God delivered them and cast on
them brightness of face and joy:
 
       And hath rewarded their constancy, with Paradise and silken robes:
 
       Reclining therein on bridal couches, nought shall they know of sun or
piercing cold:
 
       Its shades shall be close over them, and low shall its fruits hang down:
 
       And vessels of silver and goblets like flagons shall be borne round
among them:
 
       Flagons of silver whose measure themselves shall mete.
 
       And there shall they be given to drink of the cup tempered with
zendjebil (ginger)
 
       From the fount therein whose name is Selsebil (the softly flowing).
 
       Aye-blooming youths go round among them.  When thou lookest at them thou
wouldest deem them scattered pearls;
 
76:20  And when thou seest this, thou wilt see delights and a vast kingdom:
 
       Their clothing green silk robes and rich brocade: with silver bracelets
shall they be adorned; and drink of a pure beverage shall their Lord give them.
 
       This shall be your recompense.  Your efforts shall meet with thanks.
 
       We ourselves have sent down to thee the Koran as a missive from on high.
 
       Await then with patience the judgments of thy Lord, and obey not the
wicked among them and the unbelieving:
 
       And make mention of the name of thy Lord at morn, at even,
 
       And at night.  Adore him, and praise him the livelong night.
 
       But these men love the fleeting present, and leave behind them the heavy
day of doom.
 
       Ourselves have we created them, and strengthened their joints; and when
we please, with others like unto themselves will we replace them.
 
       This truly is a warning:  And whoso willeth, taketh the way to his Lord;
 
76:30  But will it ye shall not, unless God will it, for God is Knowing, Wise.
 
       He causeth whom He will to enter into his mercy.  But for the evil
doers, He hath made ready an afflictive chastisement.
 
