SURA XXX (30) - THE GREEKS      (Mecca - 60 Verses)            (LXXIV - 210)
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       Elif. Lam. Mim.  The Greeks have been defeated
 
       In a land hard by:  But after their defeat they shall defeat their foes,
 
       In a few years.  First and last is the affair with God.  And on that day
shall the faithful rejoice
 
       In the aid of their God:  He aideth whom He will; and He is the Mighty,
the Merciful.
 
       It is the promise of God:  To his promise God will not be untrue:  but
most men know it not.
 
       They know the outward shews of this life present, but of the next life
are they careless.
 
       Have they not considered within themselves that God hath not created the
Heavens and the Earth and all that is between them but for a serious end, and
for a fixed term?  But truly most men believe not that they shall meet their
Lord.
 
       Have they never journeyed through the land, and seen what hath been the
end of those who were before them?  Mightier were they than these in strength;
and they broke up the land, and dwelt in it in greater numbers than they who
dwell there now; and their apostles came to them with proofs of their mission:
and it was not God who would wrong them, but they wronged themselves.
 
       Then evil was the end of the evil doers; because they had treated our
signs as lies, and laughed them to scorn.
 
30:10  God bringeth forth the creation - then causeth it to return again -
then to Him shall ye come back.
 
       And on that day when the hour shall arrive, the guilty shall be struck
dumb for despair,
 
       And they shall have no intercessors from among the gods whom they have
joined with God, and they shall deny the gods they joined with Him.
 
       And on that day when the Hour shall arrive, shall men be separated one
from another;
 
       And as for those who shall have believed and done the things that are
right, they shall enjoy themselves in a flowery mead;
 
       But as for those who shall not have believed, but treated our signs and
the meeting of the next life as lies, they shall be given over to the torment.
 
       Glorify God therefore when ye reach the evening, and when ye rise at
morn:
 
       And to Him be praise in the Heavens and on the Earth; and at twilight,
and when ye rest at noon.
 
       He bringeth forth the living out of the dead, and He bringeth forth the
dead out of the living: and He quickeneth the earth when dead.  Thus is it
that ye too shall be brought forth.
 
       And one of his signs it is that He hath created you out of dust; then
lo!  ye become men who spread themselves far and wide:
 
30:20  And one of his signs it is, that He hath created wives for you of your
own species, that ye may dwell with them, and hath put love and tenderness
between you.  Herein truly are signs for those who reflect.
 
       And among his signs are the creation of the Heavens and of the Earth,
and your variety of tongues and colour.  Herein truly are signs for all men.
 
       And of his signs are your sleep by night and by day, and your goings in
quest of his bounties.  Herein truly are signs to those who hearken.
 
       And of his signs are, that He sheweth you the lightning, a source of awe
and hope; and that He sendeth down rain from the heaven and giveth life by it
to the earth when dead.  Herein truly are signs to those who understand.
 
       And of his signs also one is that the Heaven and the Earth stand firm at
his bidding: hereafter, when with one summons He shall summon you out of the
earth, - lo! forth shall ye come.
 
       His, whatsoever is in the Heavens and on the Earth: all are obedient to
him.
 
       And He it is who bringeth a creature forth, then causeth it to return
again; and to him is this most easy.  To whatever is loftiest in heaven and
earth is He to be likened; and He is the Mighty, the Wise.
 
       He setteth forth to you an instance drawn from yourselves.  Have ye
among the slaves whom you right hands have won, any partner in what we have
bestowed on you, so that ye share alike?  Fear ye them as ye fear each other?
(Thus make we our signs clear to men of understanding.)
 
       No, ye do not.  But the wicked, devoid of knowledge, follow their own
desires:  and those whom God shall mislead, who shall guide, and who shall be
their protector?
 
       Set thou thy face then, as a true convert, towards the Faith which God
hath made, and for which He hath made man.  No change is there in the creation
of God.  This is the right Faith, but the greater part of men know it not.
 
30:30  And be ye turned to Him, and fear Him, and observe prayer, and be not
of those who unite gods with God:
 
       Of those who have split up their religion, and have become sects, where
every party rejoices in what is their own.
 
       When some evil toucheth men, they turn to their Lord and call upon him:
then when he hath made them taste his mercy, lo, a part of them join other gods
with their Lord,
 
       Ungrateful for our favours!  Enjoy yourselves then.  But in the end ye
shall know your folly.
 
       Have we sent down to them any mandate which speaketh in favour of what
they join with God?
 
       When we cause men to taste mercy they rejoice in it; but if, for that
which their hands have aforetime wrought, evil befall them, they despair.
 
       See they not that God bestoweth full supplies on whom, He pleaseth and
giveth sparingly to whom He pleaseth?  Signs truly are there herein to those
who believe.
 
       To him who is of kin to thee give his due, and to the poor and to the
wayfarer: this will be best for those who seek the face of God; and with them
it shall be well.
 
       Whatever ye put out at usury to increase it with the substance of others
shall have no increase from God: but whatever ye shall give in alms, as seeking
the face of God, shall be doubled to you.
 
       It is God who created you - then fed you - then will cause you to die -
then will make you alive.  Is there any of your companion-gods who can do aught
of these things?  Praise be to Him! and far be He exalted above the gods they
join with Him.
 
30:40  Destruction hath appeared by land and by sea on account of what men's
hands have wrought, that it might make them taste somewhat of the fruit of
their doings, that haply they might turn to God.
 
       Say:  Journey through the land, and see what hath been the end of those
who were before you!  The greater part of them joined other gods with God.
 
       Set thy face then towards the right faith, ere the day come which none
can hinder God from bring on.  On that day shall they be parted in twain:
 
       Unbelievers on whom shall be their unbelief; and they who have wrought
righteousness, and prepared for themselves couches of repose:
 
       That of his bounty He may reward those who have believed and wrought
righteousness; for the unbelievers He loveth not.
 
       And one of his signs is that He sendeth the winds with glad tidings of
rain, both that He may cause you to taste his mercy, and that ships may sail at
his command, that out of his bounties ye may seek wealth, and that haply ye may
render thanks.
 
       We have sent apostles before thee to their peoples, and they presented
themselves to them with clear proofs of their mission; and while it behoved us
to succour the faithful, we took vengeance on the guilty.
 
       It is God who sendeth the winds and uplifteth the clouds, and, as He
pleaseth, spreadeth them on high, and breaketh them up; and thou mayest see the
rain issuing from their midst; and when He poureth it down on such of his
servants as He pleaseth, lo! they are filled with joy,
 
       Even they who before it was sent down to them, were in mute despair.
 
       Look then at the traces of God's mercy - how after its death he
quickeneth the earth!  This same God will surely quicken the dead, for to all
things His might is equal.
 
30:50  Yet should we send a blast, and should they see their harvest turn
yellow, they would afterwards shew themselves ungrateful.
 
       Thou canst not make the dead to hear, neither canst thou make the deaf
to hear the call, when they withdraw and turn their backs:
 
       Neither canst thou guide the blind out of their error: in sooth, none
shalt thou make to hear, save him who shall believe in our signs: for they are
resigned to our will (Muslims).
 
       It is God who hath created you in weakness, then after weakness hath
given you strength:  then after strength, weakness and grey hairs:  He createth
what He will; and He is the Wise, the Powerful.
 
       And on the day whereon the Hour shall arrive, the wicked will swear
 
       That not above an hour have they waited:  Even so did they utter lies on
earth:
 
       But they to whom knowledge and faith have been given will say, "Ye have
waited, in accordance with the book of God, till the day of Resurrection:  for
this is the day of the Resurrection - but ye knew it not."
 
       On that day their plea shall not avail the wicked, neither shall they
again be bidden to seek acceptance with God.
 
       And now have we set before men, in this Koran, every kind of parable:
yet if thou bring them a single verse of it, the infidels will surely say, "Ye
are only utterers of vain things."
 
       It is thus that God hath sealed up the hearts of those who are devoid of
knowledge.
 
30:60  But do thou, Muhammad, bear with patience, for true is the promise of
God; and let not those who have no firm belief, unsettle thee.
 
 
