SURA LXIII (63) - The Hypocrites     (Medina - 11 Verses)         (CIV - 442)  
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       When the Hypocrites come to thee, they say, "We bear witness that thou
art the Sent One of God."  God knoweth that thou art His Sent One: but God
beareth witness that the Hypocrites do surely lie.
 
       Their faith have they used as a cloak, and they turn aside others from
thew ay of God!  Evil are all their doings.
 
       This, for that they believed, then became unbelievers!  Therefore hath a
seal been set upon their hearts, and they understand not.
 
       When thou seest them, their persons make thee marvel; and if they speak,
thou listenest with pleasure to their discourse.  Like timbers are they leaning
against a wall!  They think that every shout is against them.  They are enemies
- Beware of them then - God do battle with them!  How false are they!
 
       And when it is said to them, "Come, the Apostle of God will ask pardon
for you," they turn their heads aside, and thou seest them withdraw in their
pride.
 
       Alike shall it be to them whether thou ask forgiveness for them, or ask
it not.  By no means will God forgive them:  God hath no guidance for a
perverse people.
 
       These are they who say to you of Medina, "Spend not aught upon those who
are with the Apostle of God, and they will be forced to quit him."  Yet the
treasures of the Heavens and of the Earth are God's!  But the Hypocrites have
no understanding.
 
       They say:  "If we return to the city, the mightier will assuredly drive
out the weaker from it."  But might is with God, and with the Apostle, and with
the Faithful!  Yet the Hypocrites understand not.
 
       O ye who believe! let not your wealth and your children delude you
into forgetfulness of God.,  Whoever shall act thus, shall surely suffer loss.
 
63:10  And expend in the cause of God out of that with which we have supplied
you, ere death surprise each one of you, and he say, "O Lord! wilt thou not
respite me to a term not far distant, that I may give alms, and become one of
the just?"
 
       And by no means will God respite a soul when its hour hath come!  And
God is fully cognisant of what ye do.
 
 
