SURA LXXX (80) - He Frowned    (Mecca - 42)           (XXIV - 39)           
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       He Frowned, and he turned his back,
 
       Because the blind man came to him!
 
       But what assured thee that he would not be cleansed by the Faith,
 
       Or be warned, and the warning profit him?
 
       As to him who is wealthy -
 
       To him thou wast all attention:
 
       Yet is it not thy concern if he be not cleansed:
 
       But as to him who cometh to thee in earnest,
 
       And full of fears -
 
80:10  Him dost thou neglect.
 
       Nay! but it (the Koran) is a warning;
 
       (And whoso is willing beareth it in mind)
 
       Written on honoured pages,
 
       Exalted, purified,
 
       By the hands of Scribes, honoured, righteous.
 
       Cursed be man!  What hath made him unbelieving?
 
       Of what thing did God create him,
 
80:20  Then made him an easy passage from the womb,
 
       Then caused him to die and burieth him;
 
       Then, when he pleaseth, will raise him again to life.
 
       Aye! but man hath not yet fulfilled the bidding of his Lord.
 
       Let man look at his food:
 
       It was We who rained down the copious rains,
 
       Then cleft the earth with clefts,
 
       And caused the upgrowth of the grain,
 
       And grapes and healing herbs,
 
       And the olive and the palm,
 
80:30  And enclosed gardens thick with trees,
 
       And fruits and herbage,
 
       For the service of yourselves and of your cattle.
 
       But when the stunning trumpet-blast shall arrive,
 
       On that day shall a man fly from his brother,
 
       And his mother and his father,
 
       And his wife and his children;
 
       For every man of them on that day his own concerns shall be enough.
 
       There shall be faces on that day radiant,
 
       Laughing and joyous:
 
80:40  And faces on that day with dust upon them:
 
       Blackness shall cover them!
 
       These are the Infidels, the Impure.
 
