SURA LXXXIII (83) - Those Who Stint  (Mecca - 36 Verses        (XLI - 57)       
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       Woe to those who Stint the measure:
 
       Who when they take by measure from others, exact the full;
 
       But when they mete to them or weigh to them, minish -
 
       What! have they no thought that they shall be raised again
 
       For the great day?
 
       The day when mankind shall stand before the Lord of the worlds.
 
       Yes! the register of the wicked is in Sidjin.
 
       And who shall make thee understand what Sidjin is?
 
       It is a book distinctly written.
 
83:10  Woe, on that day, to those who treated our signs as lies,
 
       Who treated the day of judgment as a lie!
 
       None treat it as a lie, save the transgressor, the criminal,
 

       Who, when our signs are rehearsed to him, saith, "Tales of the
Ancients!"
 
       Yes; but their own works have got the mastery over their hearts.
 
       Yes; they shall be shut out as by a veil from their Lord on that day;
 
       Then shall they be burned in Hell-fire:
 
       Then shall it be said to them, "This is what ye deemed a lie."
 
       Even so.  But the register of the righteous is in Illiyoun.
 
       And who shall make thee understand what Illiyoun is?
 
83:20  A book distinctly written;
 
       The angels who draw nigh unto God attest it.
 
       Surely, among delights shall the righteous dwell!
 
       Seated on bridal couches they will gaze around;
 
       Thou shalt mark in their faces the brightness of delight;
 
       Choice sealed wine shall be given them to quaff,
 
       The seal of musk.  For this let those pant who pant for bliss -
 
       Mingled therewith shall be the waters of Tasnim -
 
       Fount whereof they who draw nigh to God shall drink.
 
       The sinners indeed laugh the faithful to scorn:
 
83:30  And when they pass by them they wink at one another, -
 
       And when they return to their own people, they return jesting,
 
       And when they see them they say, "These are the erring ones."
 
       And yet they have no mission to be their guardians.
 
       Therefore, on that day the faithful shall laugh the infidels to scorn,
 
       As reclining on bridal couches they behold them.
 
       Shall not the infidels be recompensed according to their works?
 
