SURA XV (15) - HEDJR - (Mecca - 99 Verses)                 (LVII - 112)     
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       Elif. Lam. Ra.  These are the signs of the Book, and of a lucid recital
[Koran].
 
       Many a time will the infidels wish that they had been Muslims.
 
       Let them feast and enjoy themselves, and let hope beguile them:  but
they shall know the truth at last.
 
       We never destroyed a city whose term was not perfixed:
 
       No people can forstall or retard its destiny.
 
       They say:  "O thou to whom the warning hath been sent down, thou art
surely possessed by a djinn:
 
       Wouldst thou not have come to us with the angels, if thou wert of those
who assert the truth?"
 
       - We will not send down the angels without due cause.  The Infidels
would not in that case have been respited.
 
       Verily, We have sent down the warning, and verily, We will be its
guardian;
 
15:10  And already have We sent Apostles, before thee, among the sects of the
ancients;
 
       But never came Apostles to them whom they did not deride.
 
       In like manner will We put it into the hearts of the sinners of Mecca to
do the same:
 
       They will not believe on him though the example of those of old hath
gone before.
 
       Even were We to open above them a gate in Heaven, yet all the while they
were mounting up to is,
 
       They would surely say:  It is only that our eyes are drunken:  nay, we
are a people enchanted.
 
       We have set the signs of the zodiac in the Heavens, and adorned and
decked them forth for the beholders,
 
       And We guard them from every stoned Satan,
 
       Save such as steal a hearing:  and him doth a visible flame pursue.
 
       And the Earth have We spread forth, and thrown thereon the mountains,
and caused everything to spring froth in it in balanced measure:
 
15:20  And we have provided therein sustenance for you, and for the creatures
which not ye sustain:
 
       And no one thing is there, but with Us are its storehouses; and We send
it not down but in settled measure:
 
       And We send forth the fertilising winds, and cause the rain to come down
from the heaven, and give you to drink of it; and it is not ye who are its
storers:
 
       And We cause to live and We cause to die, and We are the heir of all
things:
 
       We know those of you who flourish first and We know those who come
later:
 
       And truly thy Lord will gather them together again, for He is Wise,
Knowing.
 
       We created man of dried clay, of dark loam moulded;
 
       And the djinn had We before created of subtle fire.
 
       Remember when thy Lord said to the Angels, "I create man of dried clay,
of dark loam moulded:
 
       And when I shall have fashioned him and breathed of my spirit into him,
then fall ye down and worship him."
 
15:30  And the Angels bowed down in worship, all of them, all together,
 
       Save Eblis:  he refused to be with those who bowed in worship.
 
       "O Eblis," said God, "wherefore art thou not with those who bow down in
worship?"
 
       He said, "It beseemeth not me to bow in worship to man whom thou hast
created of clay, of moulded loam."
 
       He said, "Begone then hence; thou art a stoned one,
 
       And the curse shall be on thee till the day of reckoning."
 
       He said, "O my Lord! respite me till the day when man shall be raised
from the dead."
 
       He said, "One then of the respited shalt thou be
 
       Till the day of the predestined time."
 
       He said, "O my Lord! because thou hast beguiled me, I will surely make
all fair seeming to them on the earth; I will surely beguile them all;
 
15:40  Except such of them as shall be thy sincere servants."
 
       He said, "This is the right way with me;
 
       For over none of my servants shalt thou have power, save those beguiled
ones who shall follow thee."
 
       And verily, Hell is the promise for them one and all.
 
       It hath seven Portals; at each Portal is a separate band of them;
 
       But 'mid gardens and fountains shall the pious dwell:
 
       "Enter ye therein in peace, secure -"
 
       And all rancour will We removed from their bosoms:  they shall sit as
brethren, face to face, on couches:
 
       Therein no weariness shall reach them, nor forth from it shall they be
cast for ever.
 
       Announce to my servants that I am the Gracious, the Merciful.
 
15:50  And that my chastisement is the grievous chastisement.
 
       And tell them of Abraham's guests.
 
       When they entered in unto him, and said, "Peace."  "Verily," said he,
"We fear you."
 
       They said, "Fear not, for of a sage son we bring thee tidings."
 
       He said, "Bring ye me such tidings now that old age hath come upon me?
What, therefore, are your tidings really?"
 
       They said, "We announce them to thee in very truth.  Be not then one of
the despairing."
 
       "And who," said he, "despaireth of the mercy of his Lord, but they who
err?"
 
       He said, "What is your business then, O ye Sent Ones?"
 
       They said, "We are sent unto a people who are sinners,
 
       Except the family of Lot, whom verily we will rescue all,
 
15:60  Except his wife.  We have decreed that she shall be of those who
linger."
 
       And when the Sent Ones came to the family of Lot
 
       He said, "Ye are persons unknown to me,"
 
       They said, "Yes; but we have come to thee for a purpose about which thy
people doubt:
 
       We have come to thee with very truth, and we are truthful envoys.
 
       Lead forth therefore thy family in the dead of the night; follow thou on
their rear:  and let no one of you turn round, but pass ye on whither ye are
bidden."
 
       And this command we gave him because to the last man should these people
be cut off at morning.
 
       Then came the people of the city rejoicing at the news -
 
       He said, "These are my guests:  therefore disgrace me not.
 
       And fear God and put me not to shame."
 
15:70  They said, "Have we not forbidden thee to entertain any one whatever?"
 
       He said, "Here are my daughters, if ye will thus act."
 
       As thou livest, O Muhammand, they were bewildered in the drunkenness of
their just.
 
       So a tempest overtook them at their sunrise,
 
       And we turned the city upside down, and we rained stones of baked clay
upon them.
 
       Verily, in this are signs for those who scan heedfully;
 
       And these cities lay on the high road.
 
       Verily, in this are signs for the faithful.
 
       The inhabitants also of El Aika were sinners:
 
       So we took vengeance on them, and they both became a plain example.
 
15:80  And the people of Hedjr treated God's messengers as liars.
 
       And we brought forth our signs to them, but they drew back from them:
 
       And they hewed them out abodes in the mountains to secure them:
 
       But a tempest surprised them at early morn,
 
       And their labours availed them nothing.
 
       We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that between them
is, but for a worthy end.  And verily, "the hour" shall surely come.  Wherefore
do thou, Muhammad, forgive with kindly forgiveness,
 
       For they Lord!  He is the Creator, the Wise.
 
       We have already given thee the seven verses of repetition and the
glorious Koran.
 
       Strain not thine eyes after the good things we have bestowed on some of
the unbelievers:  afflict not thyself on their account, and lower thy wing to
the faithful.
 
       And Say:  I am the only plain-spoken warner.
 
15:90  We will punish those who foster divisions,
 
       Who break up the Koran into parts:
 
       By they Lord! we will surely take account from them one and all,
 
       Concerning that which they have done.
 
       Profess publicly then what thou hast been bidden, and withdraw from
those who join gods to God.
 
       Verily, We will maintain thy cause against those who deride thee,
 
       Who set up gods with God:  and at last shall they know their folly.
 
       Now know We that they heart is distressed at what they say:
 
       But do thou celebrate the praise of thy Lord, and be of those who bow
down in worship;
 
       And serve thy Lord till the certainty o'ertake thee.
 
