SURA LII (52) - The Mountain     Mecca - 49 Verses              (XLIV - 63   
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       By the mountain,
 
       And by the Book written
 
       On an outspread roll,
 
       And by the frequented fane,
 
       And by the lofty vault,
 
       And by the swollen sea,
 

       Verily, a chastisement from thy Lord is imminent,
 
       And none shall put it back.
 
       Reeling on that day the Heaven shall reel,
 
52:10  And stirring shall the mountains stir.
 
       And woe, on that day, to those who called the apostles liars,
 
       Who plunged for pastime into vain disputes -
 
       On that day shall they be trust with thrusting to the fire of Hell: -
 
       "This is the fire which ye treated as a lie.
 
       What! is this magic, then? or, do ye not see it?
 
       Burn ye therein: bear it patiently or impatiently 'twill be the same to
you: for ye shall assuredly receive the reward of your doings."
 
       But mid gardens and delights shall they dwell who have feared God,
 
       Rejoicing in what their Lord have given them; and that from the pain of
hell-fire hath their Lord preserved them.
 
       "Eat and drink with healthy enjoyment, in recompense for your deeds."
 
52:20  On couches ranged in rows shall they recline; and to the damsels with
large dark eyes will we wed them.
 
       And to those who have believed, whose offspring have followed them in
the faith, will we again unite their offspring; nor of the meed of their works
will we in the least defraud them.  Pledged to God is every man for his actions
and their desert.
 
       And fruits in abundance will we give them, and flesh as they shall
desire:
 
       Therein shall they pass to one another the cup which shall engender no
light discourse, no motive to sin:
 
       And youths shall go round among them beautiful as imbedded pearls:
 
       And shall accost one another and ask mutual questions.
 
       "A time indeed there was," will they say, "when we were full of care as
to the future lot of our families;
 
       But kind hath God been to us, and from the pestilential torment hath he
preserved us;
 
       For, heretofore we called upon Him - and He is the Beneficent, the
Merciful."
 
       Warn thou, then.  Four thou by the favour of thy Lord art neither
soothsayer nor possessed.
 
52:30  Will they say, "A poet! let us await some adverse turn of his fortune?"
 
       Say, wait ye, and in sooth I too will wait with you.
 
       Is it their dreams which inspire them with then? or is it that they are
a perverse people?
 
       Will they say, "He hath forged it (the Koran) himself?"  Nay, rather it
is that they believed not.
 
       Let them then produce a discourse like it, if they speak the Truth.
 
       Were they created by nothing? or were they the creators of themselves?
 
       Created they the Heavens and the Earth?  Nay, rather, they have no
faith.
 
       Hold they thy Lord's treasures?  Bear they the rule supreme?
 
       Have they a ladder for hearing the angels?  Let any one who hath heard
them bring a clear proof of it.
 
52:40  Asked thou pay of them? they are themselves weighed down with debts.
 
       Have they such a knowledge of the secret things that they can write them
down?
 
       Desire they to lay snares for thee?  But the snared ones shall be they
who do not believe.
 
       Have they any God beside God?  Glory be to God above what they join with
Him.
 
       And should they see a fragment of the heaven falling down, they would
say, "It is only a dense cloud."
 
       Leave them then until they come face to face with the day when they
shall swoon away:
 
       A day in which their snares shall not at all avail them, neither shall
they be helped.
 
       And verily, beside this is there a punishment for the evil-doers: but
most of them know it not.
 
       Wait thou patiently the judgment of thy Lord, for thou art in our eye;
and celebrate the praise of thy Lord when thou risest up,
 
       And in the night-season:  Praise him when the stars are setting.
 
 
