SURA LXXVII (77) - The Sent   (Mecca - 50 Verses)     (XXXVI - 50)            
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       By the train of The Sent ones,
 
       And the swift in their swiftness;
 
       By the scatterers who scatter,
 
       And the distinguishers who distinguish;
 
       And by those that give forth the word
 
       To excuse or warn;
 
       Verily that which ye are promised is imminent.
 
       When the stars, therefore, shall be blotted out,
 
       And when the heaven shall be cleft,
 
77:10  And when the mountains shall be scattered in dust,
 
       And when the Apostles shall have a time assigned them;
 
       Until what day shall that time be deferred?
 
       To the day of severing!
 
       And who shall teach thee what the day of severing is?
 
       Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!
 
       Have we not destroyed them of old?
 
       We will next cause those of later times to follow them.
 
       Thus deal we with the evil doers.
 
       Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!
 
77:20  Have we not created you of a sorry germ,
 
       Which we laid up in a secure place,
 
       Till the term decreed for birth?
 
       Such is our power! and how powerful are We!
 
       Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!
 
       Have we not made the earth to hold
 
       The living and the dead?
 
       And placed on it the tall firm mountains, and given you to drink of
sweet water.
 
       Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!
 
       Begone to that Hell which ye called a lie: -
 
77:30  Begone to the shadows that lie in triple masses;
 
       "But not against the flame shall they shade or help you:" -
 
       The sparks which it casteth out are like towers -
 
       Like tawny camels.
 
       Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!
 
       On that day they shall not speak,
 
       Nor shall it be permitted them to allege excuses.
 
       Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!
 
       This is the day of severing, when we will assemble you and your
ancestors.
 
       If now ye have any craft truly your craft on me.
 
77:40  Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!
 
       But the god-fearing shall be placed amid shades and fountains,
 
       And fruits, whatsoever they shall desire:
 
       "Eat and drink, with health, as the meed of your toils."
 
       Thus recompense we the good.
 
       Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!
 
       "Eat ye and enjoy yourselves a little while.  Verily, ye are doers. of
evil."
 
       Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!
 
       For when it is said to them, bend the knee, they bend it not.
 
       Woe on that day to those who charged with imposture!
 
77:50  In what other revelation after this will they believe?
 
 
