SURA LXI (61) - Battle Array     (Medina - 14 verses)         (XCVIII - 405)  
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       All that is in the Heavens and all that is on the Earth praiseth God.  He
is the Mighty, the Wise!
 
       Believers! why profess ye that which ye practise not?
 
       Most hateful is it to God they ye say that which ye do not.
 
       Verily God loveth those who, as though they were a solid wall, do battle
for his cause in serried lines!
 
       And bear in mind when Moses said to his people, "Why grieve ye me, O my
people, wehn ye know that I am God's apostle unto you?"  And when they went
astray, God led their hearts astry; for God guideth not a perverse people:
 
       And remember when Jesus the son of Mary said, "O children of Israel! of a
truth I am God's apostle to you to confirm the law which was given before me,
and to announce an apostle that shall come after me whose name shall be Ahmad!"
But when he (Ahmad) presented himself with clear proofs of his mission, they
said, "This is manifest sorcery!"
 
       But who more impious than he who when called to Islam deviseth a
falsehood concerning God?  God guideth not the wicked!
 
       Fain would they put out the light of God with their mouths! but though
the Infidels hate it, God will perfect his light.
 
       He it is who hath sent his apostle with guidance and the religion of
truth, that, though they hate it who join other gods with God, He may make it
victorious over every other religion.
 
61:10  O ye who believe! shall I shew you a merchandise that shall deliver you
from the sore torment?
 
       Believe in God and his apostle, and do valiantly in the cause of God
with your wealth and with your persons!  This, did ye but know, will be best
for you.
 
       Your sins will He forgive you, and He will bring you into gardens
beneath whose shades the rivers flow - into charming abodes in the gardens of
Eden:  This shall be the great bliss. -
 
       And other things which ye desire will he bestow.  Help from God and
speedy conquest!  Bear thou these tidings to the faithful.
 
       O ye who believe! be helpers (ansars) of God; as said Jesus the son of
Mary to his apostles, "Who will come to the help of God?"  "We," said the
apostles, "will be helpers of God."  And a part of the children of Israel
believed, and a part believed not.  But to those who believed gave we the
upper-hand over their foes, and soon did they prove victorious.
 
 
