SURA LXII (62)  - The Assembly       (Medina - 11 Verses)         (XCIV - 373)
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       All that is in the Heavens, and all that is on the Earth, uttered the
Praise of God, the King! the Holy! the Mighty! the Wise!
 
       It is He who hath sent to the pagan folk (Arabs) an Apostle from among
themselves, to rehearse His signs to them, and to purify them, and to impart to
them a knowledge of "the Book" and wisdom; for aforetime were they in manifest
error.
 
       And others among them have not yet overtaken those who preceded them in
the faith.  But He is the Mighty, the Wise!
 
       This is the goodness of God: He bestoweth it on whom He will: God is of
immense goodness!
 
       They on whom the burden of the law was laid, and would not bear it, are
like an ass beneath a load of books.  A sorry likeness this, for the people
who give the lie to the signs of God!  God guideth not the people who do this
wrong!
 
       Say:  O ye Jews, if ye profess that ye rather than other men are the
friends of God, then wish for death if ye are men of truth.
 
       But never on account of their previous handywork will they wish for it,
and God knoweth the wrong doers.
 
       Say:  Verily the death from which ye flee will surely meet you.  Then
shall ye be brought back to Him who knoweth alike the things done in secret and
openly: and He will tell you of your actions.
 
       O ye who believe!  When ye are summoned to prayer on the day of the
Assembly, haste to the commemoration of God, and quit your traffic.  This, if
ye knew it, will be best for you.
 
62:10  And when the Prayer is ended, then disperse yourselves abroad and go in
quest of the bounties of God; and, that it may be well with you, oft remember
God.
 
       But when they get a sight of merchandise or sport, they disperse after
it, and leave thee standing alone.  Say:  God hath in reserve what is better
than sport or wares.  And God is the best provider!
 
 
