SURA XXXII (32) - ADORATION     (Mecca - 30 Verses)             (LXX - 190    
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.
 
       Elif. Lam. Mim.  This Book is without a doubt a Revelation sent down
from the Lord of the Worlds.
 
       Will they say, He hath forged it?  Nay, it is the truth from thy Lord
that thou mayest warn a people to whom no warner hath come before thee, that
haply they may be guided.
 
       God it is who hath created the Heavens and the Earth and all that is
between them in six days; then ascended his throne.  Save Him ye have no
patron, and none to plead for you.  Will ye not then reflect?
 
       From the Heaven to the Earth He governeth all things:  hereafter shall
they come up to him on a day whose length shall be a thousand of such years as
ye reckon.
 
       This is He who knoweth the unseen and the seen; the Mighty, the
Merciful,
 
       Who hath made everything which he hath created most good; and began the
creation of man with clay;
 
       Then ordained his progeny from germs of life, from sorry water:
 
       Then shaped him, and breathed of His Spirit into him, and gave you
hearing and seeing and hearts:  what little thanks do ye return!
 
       And they say, "What! when we shall have laid hidden in the earth, shall
we become a new creation?"
 
32:10  Yea, they deny that they shall meet their Lord.
 
       Say:  The angel of death who is charged with you shall cause you to die:
then shall ye be returned to your Lord.
 
       Couldst thou but see when the guilty shall droop their heads before
their Lord, and cry, "O our Lord!  we have seen and we have heard:  return us
then to life:  we will do that which is right.  Verily we believe firmly!"
 
       (Had we pleased we had certainly given to every soul its guidance.  But
true shall be the word which hath gone forth from me - I will surely fill hell
with Djinn and men together.)
 
       "Taste then the recompense of your having forgotten the meeting with
this your day.  We, too, we have forgotten you:  taste then an eternal
punishment for that which ye have wrought."
 
       They only believe in our signs, who, when mention is made of them, fall
down in adoration, and celebrate the praise of their Lord, and are not puffed
up with disdain:
 
       Who, as they raise them from their couches, call on their Lord with fear
and desire, and give alms of that with which we have supplied them.
 
       No soul knoweth what joy of the eye is reserved for the good in
recompense of their works.
 
       Shall he then who is a believer be as he who sinneth grossly? they shall
not be held alike.
 
       As to those who believe and do that which is right, they shall have
gardens of eternal abode as the meed of their works:
 
32:20  But at for those who grossly sin, their abode shall be the fire:  so
oft as they shall desire to escape out of it, back shall they be turned into
it.  And it shall be said to them, Taste ye the torment of the fire, which he
treated as a lie.
 
       And we will surely cause them to taste a punishment yet nearer at hand,
beside the greater punishment, that haply they may turn to us in penitence.
 
       Who acteth worse than he who is warned by the signs of his Lord, then
turneth away from them?  We will surely take vengeance on the guilty ones.
 
       We heretofore gave the Book of the law to Moses:  have thou no doubt as
to our meeting with him:  and we appointed it for the guidance of the children
of Israel.
 
       And we appointed Imams from among them who should guide after our
command when they had themselves endured with constancy, and had firmly
believed in our signs.
 
       Now thy Lord!  He will decide between them on the day of resurrection as
to the subject of their disputes.
 
       Is it not notorious to them how many generations, through whose abodes
they walk, we have destroyed before them?  Truly herein are signs:  will they
not then hear?
 
       See they not how we drive the rain to some parched land and thereby
bring forth corn of which their cattle and themselves do not eat?  Will they
not then behold?
 
       They say, "When will this decision take place?  Tell us, if ye are men
of truth?"
 
       Say:  On the day of that decision, the faith of infidels shall not avail
them, and they shall have no further respite.
 
32:30  Stand aloof from them then, and wait thou, for they too wait.
 
