SURA LXXI (71) - Noah          (Mecca - 29 Verses)          (LI - 85)         
 
       In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
 
       We sent Noah to his people, and said to him, "Warn thou thy people ere
there come on them an afflictive punishment."
 
       He said, "O my people!  I come to you a plain-spoken warner:
 
       Sere God and fear Him, and obey me:
 
       Your sins will He forgive you, and respite you till the fixed Time; for
when God's fixed Time hath come, it shall not be put back.  Would that ye knew
this!"
 
       He said, "Lord I have cried to my people night and day; and my cry doth
but make them flee from me the more.
 
       So oft as I cry to them, that thou mayest forgive them, they thrust
their fingers into their ears, and wrap themselves in their garments, and
persist in their error, and are disdainfully disdainful.
 
       Then I cried aloud to them:
 
       Then again spake I with plainness, and in private did I secretly address
them:
 
       And I said, 'Beg forgiveness of your Lord, for He is ready to forgive.
 
71:10  He will send down the very Heaven upon you in plenteous rains;
 
       And will increase you in wealth and children; and will give you gardens,
and will give you watercourses: -
 
       What hath come to you that ye hope not for goodness from the hand of
God?

 
       For He it is who hath formed you by successive steps.
 
       See ye not how God hath created the seven heavens one over the other?
 
       And He hath placed therein the moon as a light, and hath placed there
the sun as a torch;
 
       And God hath caused you to spring forth from the earth like a plant;
 
       Hereafter will He turn you back into again, and will bring you forth
anew -
 
       And God hath spread the earth for you like a carper,
 
       That ye may walk therein along spacious paths.'"
 
71:20  Said Noah, "O my Lord! they rebel against me, and they follow those
whose riches and children do but aggravate their ruin."
 
       And they plotted a great plot;
 
       And they said, "Forsake not your Gods; forsake not Wadd nor Sowah,
 
       Nor Yaghuth and Yahuk and Nesr;"
 
       And they caused many to err; - and thou, too, O Muhammad! shall be the
means of increasing only error in the wicked -
 
       Because of their sins they were drowned, and made to go into the Fire;
 
       And they found that they had no helper save God.
 
       And Noah said, "Lord, leave not only single family of Infidels on the
Earth:
 
       For if thou leave them they will beguile thy servants and will beget
only sinners, infidels.
 
       O my Lord, forgive me, and my parents, and every one who, being a
believer, shall enter my house, and believers men and women: and add to the
wicked nought by perdition."
 
