AVESTA: VISPERAD (Extensions to the liturgy)
============================================
[Translated by L. H. Mills (From Sacred Books of the East, American Edition, 1898.)]

VISPERAD 1.
-----------
1.	I announce, and (will) complete (my Yasna) to the lords of the spiritual creatures, and to the 
lords of the earthly creatures, to the lords of those which live under the waters, and to the 
lords of those which live upon land, to the lords of those which strike the wing, and to the 
lords of those which roam (wild) upon the plains, to the lords of those of (home-beasts) of 
the cloven hoof, holy lords of the ritual order.
2.	I announce, and I (will) complete (my Yasna) to the Yearly festivals, the lords of the ritual 
order, to Maidyozarem, the milk-giver, the holy lord of the ritual order, and to 
Maidyoshahem, the pasture-giver, and to Paitishahem, the corn-giver, and to Ayathrem, the 
furtherer or breeder, the spender of the seed of males, and to Maidyarem the cold, the holy 
lord of the ritual order, and to Hamaspathmaidyem, the especial time for ritual deeds, holy 
lords of the ritual order.
3.	I announce, and I (will) complete (my Yasna) to the settlements of the future one, when the 
future shall produce them as it were anew, and I celebrate and will complete (my Yasna) to 
the Praises of the Yasna collected, completed, and much-offered, and to the Myazdas of the 
saints of the ritual, male and female.
4.	And I announce, and will complete (my Yasna) to the Seasons, the lords of the ritual order, 
and to the heard recital of the Ahuna-vairya, and to Righteousness the Best, to him who has 
(?) our praise, and to the Yenhe hatam, the frequent chant of sacrifice, the holy, and ruling in 
the ritual order.
5.	And I announce and complete (my Yasna) to the Gatha Ahunavaiti, the holy, ruling in the 
ritual order, and to those women who bring forth many sons of many talents, Mazda-given, 
and holy lords of the ritual order, and to that (chant) which has its Ahu and its Ratu (before it 
in the Yasna).
And I celebrate, and will complete (my sacrifice) to the Yasna Haptanghaiti, holy, and ruling 
in the ritual order, [and to the water Ardvi Anahita].
6.	And I announce, and I (will) complete (my Yasna) to the Gatha Ushtavaiti, the holy, ruling 
in the ritual order, and to the mountains which shine with holiness, the abundantly brilliant 
and Mazda-made, the holy lords of the ritual order.
And I announce, and (will) complete (my Yasna) to the Gatha Spenta-mainyu, the holy, 
ruling in the ritual order; and I celebrate and will complete (my Yasna) to Verethraghna (the 
blow of victory) Ahura-given, the holy lord of the ritual order.
7.	And I announce, and (will) complete (my Yasna) to the Gatha Vohu-khshathra, holy, ruling 
in the ritual order, and to Mithra of the wide pastures, and to Raman Hvastra, the holy lords 
of the ritual order. And I celebrate and will complete my Yasna to the Gatha Vahishtoishti, 
the holy, ruling in the ritual order. And I celebrate and will complete my Yasna to the good 
and pious Prayer for blessings, the benediction of the pious, and to that Yazad, the redoubted 
and swift Curse of the wise, the holy lord of the ritual order.
8.	And I announce, and (will) complete (my Yasna) to the Airyema-ishyo, the holy lord of the 
ritual order, and to the Fshusho-mathra, and to that lofty lord Hadhaokhdha, the holy lord of 
the ritual order.
9.	And I announce, and (will) complete (my Yasna) to the questions asked of Ahura, and to the 
lore of Ahura, to the Ahurian Dahvyuma (Dahyuma), and to the Ahurian Zarathushtrotema, 
holy lords of the ritual order, and to the farm-house with its pastures which give pasture to 
the Kine of blessed gift, and to the holy cattle-breeding man.


VISPERAD 2.
-----------
1.	In this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the lords of (the ritual) which are 
spiritual with my praise; and I desire to approach the earthly lords (as well). And I desire to 
approach the lords of the water with my praise, and the lords of the land; and I desire to 
approach with my praise those chiefs which strike the wing, and those which wander wild at 
large, and those of the cloven hoof, who are chiefs of the ritual (in their turn).
2.	In this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the holy Yearly festivals with my 
praise, the lords of the ritual order, Maidyozarem, the milk-giver, and Maidyoshahem, the 
pasture-giver, and Paitishahem, the corn-giver, and Ayathrem the breeder, the spender of the 
seed of males, Maidyarem, the cold, Hamaspathmaidyem, the especial time for ritual duties, 
the holy lords of the ritual order.
3.	And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the future one of the settlements 
with my praise, the holy lord of the ritual order, when the future one shall produce (them as 
it were anew).
And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach all these chieftains of the ritual 
with my praise whom Ahura Mazda mentioned to Zarathushtra for sacrifice and homage 
because of Asha Vahishta (of Righteousness the Best).
4.	And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach Thee, the lord, with my praise, 
Thou who art Ahura Mazda, the spiritual lord and regulator of the spiritual creatures [the lord 
and regulator of the spiritual creation].
And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach thee, Zarathushtra Spitama, with 
my praise, the terrestrial (lord and regulator) of the terrestrial creation, [the lord and 
regulator of the terrestrial creation].
5.	And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the man who recites the ritual 
rites with my praise, who is maintaining thus the thought well thought, and the word well 
spoken, and the deed well done, and Piety the bountiful, even him who maintains the Mathra 
of the Saoshyant, by whose actions the settlements are advanced in the righteous order.
6.	And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the (yearly) Seasons with my 
praise, the holy lords of the ritual order, and the Ahuna-vairya as it is recited, and Asha 
Vahishta when he is lauded, and the Yenhe hatam, the frequent chant of sacrifice.
7.	And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the Gatha Ahunavaiti with my 
praise. And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to worship those women with my 
praise who are well portioned, and of good parentage, and who are stately in their growth; 
yea, I desire to approach that chant in my praise which has the Ahu and the Ratu, [for He is 
verily the one who has the Ahu and the Ratu, that is, Ahura Mazda].
And I desire to approach the heroic Yasna Haptanghaiti in my praise, the holy, and ruling in 
the ritual order; and Ardvi Sura Anahita, the holy, and ruling in the ritual order.
8.	And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the Gatha Ushtavaiti with my 
praise, the holy, and ruling in the ritual order; and I desire to approach those mountains with 
my praise which shine with holiness, abundantly glorious, Mazda-made, the holy lords of the 
ritual order, and the Gatha Spenta-mainyu, and Verethraghna, the blow of victory, Mazda-
given, the holy lord of the ritual order, and the Victorious Ascendancy (which it bestows).
9.	And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the Gatha Vohu-khshathra with 
my praise, the holy, and ruling in the ritual order, and Mithra of the wide pastures, and 
Raman Hvastra, and the Gatha Vahishtoishti, and the pious and good prayer for blessings, and 
the pious and holy man, and that Yazad, the redoubted and swift curse of the wise.
10.	And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the Airyema-ishyo with my 
praise, and the Fshusho-mathra, and that lofty lord, the Hadhaokhdha, holy lord(s) of the 
ritual order.
11.	And in this Zaothra with this Baresman I desire to approach the question asked of Ahura, and 
the lore of the Lord (which he reveals in answer) and the farm-house of the man possessed of 
pastures, and the pasture produced for the Kine of blessed gift, and the holy cattle-breeding 
man.


VISPERAD 3 - BEGINNING OF THE HAOMA OFFERING; ROLL-CALL OF THE PRIEST.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
1.	(The Zaotar speaks.) (I call for) the Havanan, and would have him here.
(The Ratu answers.) I will come (and fulfill his duties).
(The Zaotar speaks.) I would have the Atarevakhsha here.
(The Ratu answers.) I will come (and fulfill the services which fall to his charge).
(The Zaotar.) I would have the Frabaretar.
(The Ratu.) I will come (and fulfill the services which fall to his charge).
(The Zaotar.) I would have the Aberet present.
(The Ratu.) I will come (for him).
(The Zaotar.) I would have the Asnatar.
(The Ratu.) I will come (and do the duties which he serves).
(The Zaotar.) I would have the Raethwishkar to be here.
(The Ratu.) I will come (for him).
(The Zaotar.) I would have the Sraoshavareza present, the wisest one, the most correct and 
veracious in his speech
(The Ratu.) I will come. 2. (The Zaotar.) I would have the Fire-priest to be here, and the 
warrior, and the thrifty tiller of the earth, and the house-lord, and the lords of the Vis and the 
Zantu.
3.	And I summon the youth of holy thoughts, words and works, and of good conscience; (yea), 
the youth of good speech, given (in marriage) to his kin. And I summon the province-ranger, 
and the itinerant of many arts, and the house-mistress.
4.	And I summon the woman advanced in her holy thoughts, and words, and deeds, and well 
subordinated, whose ruler is her lord, the holy one, who is (as) the bounteous Armaiti; (yea), I 
summon even Thy wives, O Ahura ! And I summon likewise the holy man advanced in his 
good thoughts, and words, and deeds, who is learned in pious lore, and innocent of the 
Kayadha, and by whose deeds the settlements are furthered in the righteous order.
5.	Yea, we summon you, whoever you may be, if only chiefs of the Mazdayasnians; and we 
summon the Bounteous Immortals, and the pious Saoshyants (the prophets for our help), the 
most correct and truthful in their speech, the most zealous, the most glorious in their 
thoughts, the greatest ones, and the powerful; and we summon the Fire-priests, and the 
warriors, and the diligent husbandman of the Mazdayasnian faith.
6.	(The Zaotar.) As an Ahu to be (revered and) chosen, the Atarevakhsha (announcing) speaks 
forth to me.
(The Ratu [?].) So let the Ratu from his righteousness, holy and learned, speak forth.
(The Ratu.) As an Ahu to be (revered and) chosen, the Zaotar (announcing) speaks forth to 
me.
(The Zaotar.) So let the Ratu from (his) righteousness, holy and learned, speak forth.
(The Ratu.) Thou art the announcer for us, O Fire-priest! [(Pazand.) It is the Zaotar (who is 
meant).]
(The Zaotar.) I will come as this Zaotar, and recite the Staota Yesnya with memorized 
intoning, chanting, and praise.


VISPERAD 4.
-----------
1.	(Yea,) we sacrifice to the thoughts of the mind, and to the good wisdom, and to the good and 
blessed sanctity, and to the good religious knowledge, and to good health (of soul and body). 
[At their (several) seasons, and with the presence of seasonable circumstances, they are 
hymned.] 2. Confession is to be made for the Kine; we, Zarathushtrian Mazdayasnians, 
celebrate at the sacrificial time for the Myazda-offering, at the time for the Ratufriti, the 
prayer for blessings, for the sacrificial worship, homage, propitiation, and praise of the entire 
creation of the holy (and the clean).


VISPERAD 5.
-----------
1.	I come to You, O Ye Bountiful Immortals! as a praiser priest, and invoker, as a memoriser, 
reciting (Your ritual), and as a chanter for Your sacrifice and homage, Your propitiation, and 
Your praise; (yea, for Yours) the Bountiful Immortals, and for our preparation, (O ye holy 
Saoshyants!) and for your well-timed prayer for blessings, and your sanctification, and for our 
victorious smiting of our foes, beneficial (as it is) for our souls, for ours, the Saoshyants, 
(with you), and holy. 2. And I make my offering to You, O Ye Bountiful Immortals, who rule 
aright, and who dispose (of all) aright! (Yea), I offer You the flesh of my very body, and all 
the blessings of my life as well.
3.	And I confess my belief in Thee, O Ahura Mazda! and as a Mazdayasnian of the order of 
Zarathushtra, and in accordance with this Faith.


VISPERAD 6.
-----------
1.	In accordance with the precept, with praise, and with the joyful reception of grace, with 
Zaothras intelligently offered, with sacrificial words correctly spoken, I call the good Amesha 
Spenta by their names of beauty; yea, I worship the Bountiful Immortals by their beautiful 
names, with the blessing of the ritual Order, with the longing blessing of Righteousness the 
good.


VISPERAD 7.
-----------
1.	We worship the (sacrificial) words correctly uttered, and Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, and 
the good Ashi, (the blest order of our rites), and Nairya-sangha. And we worship the 
victorious Peace as the unprostrated and unmoved. And we sacrifice to the Fravashis of the 
saints, and to the Chinwad Bridge, and to the Garo Nmana of Ahura, even Heaven, the best 
world of the saints, the shining and all glorious!
2.	And we sacrifice to that better path that leads to that Best World (as well). And we worship 
Arshtat (Justice) the good, which helps the settlements to advance and flourish, benefiting 
them thereby, that Arshtat which is the Mazdayasnian Faith; and (with her) we worship 
Rashnu the most just, and Mithra of the wide pastures. And we worship Parendi the wealthy, 
wealthy with a wealth of thoughts, with a throng of words, and with a breadth of actions, [for 
she makes our persons agile (for good thoughts and words and actions)] 3. And we worship 
that virile defensive Heroism which possesses men who think beforehand, and heroic men, 
which is fleeter a than the fleet, stronger than the strong, which comes to him who is 
endowed by God, which, when especially made theirs by men, produces one who is a freer of 
the body. And we worship Sleep, the Mazda-made, the gladdener of the herd and men. 4. And 
we worship those things in the creation of the holy which are the ancient institutions, those 
formed before the sky, the water, the land, the plants, and the Kine of blessed gift. And we 
worship the sea Vouru-kasha, and the stormy wind which is made by Mazda, and the shining 
heaven, of old created, the first-made earthly object of (all) the earthly world.
5.	And we worship thee, the Fire, O Ahura Mazda's son! the holy lord of the ritual order, and 
this Baresman, having the Zaothra with it, and the girdle with it, spread out with sanctity, the 
holy ritual chief, and we worship Apam-napat (the son of waters)


VISPERAD 8.
-----------
1.	With this word be Thou approached, with the proper word be Thou present here, Thou who 
art Ahura Mazda, the holy, together with the good Yazads who are the Bountiful Immortals, 
who rule aright, and dispose (of all) aright, together with fifty, and a hundred, and a thousand, 
and ten thousand, and millions, and yet more.
2.	And to Him who rules the best let the Kingdom be!


VISPERAD 9.
-----------
1.	(I desire to offer my homage and my praise) to the offered Haomas and Zaothras, and to 
those also which shall yet be offered, which smite victoriously, and are foes of hatred, and 
following in company (as they do) with the healing virtues of sanctity, following also in 
company with those of Chishti (religious knowledge), and with the remedies of Mazda, and 
with those of Zarathushtra and the Zarathushtrotema, (2) and to the offered Haomas and 
Zaothras which accompany those remedies which belong to the holy disciple well versed in 
good devices, and accompanying those of the itinerant also versed in good devices, and 
accompanying those likewise of the good Mazdayasnian Faith, and those of the pious and 
beneficent Prayer for blessings, and of the pious and good veracity, and of the pious word 
against unbelief, (3) for information and explanation, for preparation (?) and devotion, for 
the libation and complete offering, for the complete recital of the liturgy memorized as well; 
and to those Haomas which are pungent, bounteous, holy, and offered with sanctity (and for a 
blessing), to those which are yet to be offered with sanctity, and which are now being 
celebrated, and which are likewise in the future to be celebrated, to those which are being 
pressed with sanctity, and to those which are yet to be pressed, (to these I desire to approach, 
and to express my homage and my praise). 4. And I desire to express my homage and my 
praise to the strength of the strong, and to the victorious blow of the mighty, to the powerful 
Rectitude and Blessedness, to Chisti and the Priority for the powerful Ascendancy, and to 
these powerful Yazads which are the Bountiful Immortals, who rule aright, and dispose of all 
aright, ever-living, ever-helpful, who, male and female, dwell together with the Good Mind, 
(to these I desire in my homage and my praises to approach); (5) (yea, I desire to approach 
for homage and praises toward) our Universal Weal and Immortality, to the body of the 
Kine, and to the Kine's Soul. (And I desire to approach) the Fire of the spoken name, and 
toward that farm-house which is sanctified and which has fields and comfort, and mercy (for 
the poor); (6) as a praiser with praise for the sacrifice, homage, which is this praise of Ahura 
Mazda, of the Bountiful Immortals, and of the holy and lofty Lord, for the sacrifice, and 
homage of the Lord that most attains his ends, and which is this praise of that blessedness 
which has approached us, and of that well-timed prayer for blessings offered in the ritual, (7) 
which is likewise the praise of the Mathra Spenta (the bounteous word of reason), and of the 
Mazdayasnian Religion, and the Praises of the Yasnas, which is also that of all the lords of 
the ritual, and of all the well-timed prayers for blessings, for the sacrifice, homage, 
propitiation, and glorification of the entire creation of the holy (and the clean).


VISPERAD 10.
------------
1.	I desire to approach the Arezahis with my praise, and the Savahis, and Fradadhafshu, and 
Vidadhafshu, and Vouru-bareshti, and Vouru-jareshti, and this Karshvar which is Hvaniratha. 
2. And I desire to approach the stone mortar with my praise, and the iron mortar, and the 
cup that holds the Zaothra, and the hair (which stays the spilling 3), and Thy Baresman 
spread with sanctity. And I desire to approach the Ahuna-vairya with my praise, and the 
ritual prayers beside Ahuna, and the standing offices of the Mazdayasnian Faith.


VISPERAD 11.
------------
1.	To Ahura Mazda would we present our offered Haomas and that which is lifted up, as the 
most beneficial to Verethraghna (the blow of victory) which furthers the settlements; and 
that which is offered to the good and holy king, and that which is offered to the holy ruler 
which rules according to, or in the ritual, and we make known our Haomas to the Bountiful 
Immortals, and to the good waters; and we present our Haomas each to (our) own soul; and 
we announce our Haomas in our celebration to the entire creation of the holy (and the 
clean).
2.	Yea, we present these Haomas and Haoma implements, and these spread mats, and these 
Myazdas, these stones, the first in the creation, the stone mortar brought here with the 
yellow Haoma in it, and the iron mortar brought here with the yellow Haoma in it, this 
Haoma-water, and this Baresman spread with sanctity, (3) these bodies, and (their) forces, 
these striving Zaothras (that seek to find Thy grace), this holy Haoma, and the flesh, and the 
holy man, and the saint's innate thoughts, even the Saoshyants' innate thoughts.
And we present this fresh milk as an offering, now lifted up with sanctity, and this 
Hadhanaepata plant, lifted up with sanctity; (4) and we offer, and present these Zaothras with 
our celebration, having the Haoma with them, and the milk, and the Hadhanaepata, to the 
good waters and offered up with piety. And we present the Haoma-water in our celebrations 
to the good waters, and both the stone and the iron mortar, (5) and this branch for the 
Baresman, and the prayer for blessings uttered at the fitting moment which has approached 
(for our help in its order with the prayers), and the recollection and practice of the good 
Mazdayasnian law, and the heard recital of the Gathas, the well-timed prayer for blessings as 
it comes uttered by the saint (and for our help), and ruling (while it is spoken) as a ritual lord, 
and these wood-billets, and the perfume even Thine, the Fire's, O Ahura Mazda's son! and all 
good objects (which are ours), and Mazda-made, and which have the seed of sanctity (or are 
that seed).
6.	Yea, these we make known and we announce in this our celebration to Ahura Mazda (as our 
gift), and to Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, and to Ashi (who is the recompense),and to 
Rashnu the most just, and to Mithra of the wide pastures, and to the Bountiful Immortals, and 
the Fravashis of the saints, and to their souls, and to the Fire of Ahura Mazda, the lord, and 
to the lofty lord (the Apam-napat?), and to the Myazda, the lord, and to the well-timed 
prayer for blessings as it rules in the order of our prayers, for the sacrifice, homage, 
propitiation, and adoration of the entire creation of the holy (and the clean).
7.	Yea, these we make known in this our celebration hereby for the Fravashi of Zarathushtra 
Spitama, the saint, for its sacrifice, homage, propitiation, and praise, and to the (Fravashi) of 
Anghuyu (?) who hath loved righteousness, together with all the holy Fravashis of the saints, 
of those now dead, and of those of the living, and of those of men unborn, of the prophets 
that shall serve us, bringing on the renovation of the completed world.
8-11.	(See verses 2-5.)
12.	Yea, we would make these known hereby in our celebrations to the Bountiful Immortals, who 
rule aright, and who dispose (of all) aright, the ever-living, ever-helpful, who are good (?), 
and bestowers of the good, who dwell with the Good Mind: [(Pazand) for they who are the 
Bountiful Immortals abide with the Good Mind, they who rule aright, and dispose (of all) 
aright, for thence they are regulated, and thence they arose, (namely,) from the Good Mind].
13.	And we make known these our celebrations as the more promotive for this house, for the 
furtherance of this house, and as benefits for this house, because of the increase of this 
household, as overcoming the restrictions which impede this household, and as overcoming 
the harmful malice which may mar this house, to bless its herds, and its retainers, born, and 
yet to be born, for the saints of the house as it was aforetime, of it as it stands here now, and 
to which we likewise now belong as the Saoshyants of the provinces, (14) [which (is that we 
are Saoshyants) for the saints who do good deeds, and of the female saints who do good deeds, 
and of the saints who do the deeds conspicuously good, and of the females likewise thus, of 
the saints who do good deeds upon good deeds, and of the females thus the same].
15.	And we make these known in our celebrations to the good Fravashis of the saints which are 
formidable and overwhelming in their aid. 16. And we make these known in our celebrations 
hereby to Sraosha (Obedience) the blessed, and to the good Blessedness, and to Nairya-sangha, 
and to the victorious Peace, and to Ahura Mazda's Fire, and to the lofty lord, for sacrifice, 
homage, propitiation, and for praise, to the entire creation of the holy and the clean.
17-18.	(=Vr10.1-2.)
19.	Yea, we make that known which is lifted up in offering, and which is the Avesta as the holy 
Ahura Mazda directed that it should be said, and as Zarathushtra, the holy, directed, and as I, 
the priest, who am acquainted with their sacrifice and homage, am now letting it be known. I 
who understand the lawful and legitimate Avesta, and the ritual prescripts (20) for Your 
sacrifice, homage, and propitiation, O Ye who are the Bountiful Immortals, and for our 
preparation (?), and for the success of our well-uttered prayer for blessings, for victory, 
sanctification, and the well-being of our souls, (of ours), for (we are) the holy Saoshyants.
21.	Yea, we make these known in our celebrations here, and we offer them to Him who is Ahura 
Mazda, of all the greatest, the master and the Lord.


VISPERAD 12.
------------
1.	For the offered Haomas which have been offered in libation to that lofty Lord Ahura Mazda 
and to the holy Zarathushtra Spitama (produce) abundance in cattle and in men; and this 
abundance is (as) the good Sraosha, who accompanies (us) with the great splendor of sanctity, 
and may he be here with energetic effort (to aid us in our worship).
2.	We offer the wise offerings of the Ahuna-vairya intoned with sanctity and yet to be intoned, 
possessing their many teachings of religious wisdom (as they to), and those of the two 
mortars which pour the Haomas out, and which are pushed forward with precision, and are 
now in the course of being thus advanced once more. 3. (And so we teach as well the many 
teachings of the religious wisdom) contained in the words correctly spoken, in the 
Zarathushtrian utterances, and in the ceremonies correctly practiced, and the Baresmans 
spread exactly, and the Haomas pressed correctly, and the praise, Yasnas, and the doctrines 
of the Mazdayasnian Religion with their recitations, and their movements. 4. For thus they 
may become to us more full of devices and of wisdom, and so we offer these wise ritual deeds 
in the creation, so we impart them with their many points of meaning while we (ourselves) 
still ponder them as those which Ahura Mazda, the holy One, delivered, which have (as if) 
their nourishment from Vohu Manah and their growth from the Righteous Order, which are 
the greatest of all beings, the best, and the most beautiful; for thus shall these be to us the 
more full of wisest meaning, and more full of incitation and may we be among those (who 
are) of Spenta Mainyu's world in that we are imparting (to the chosen) these precepts of the 
wisest meaning and these incitations which are contained therein. 5. And full of wisest 
meaning be ye two to us, O (thou) stone mortar, and (thou) the iron one, as ye are now 
turned, and as ye are now being advanced, ye two mortars of the house, [and of the village, of 
the tribe, and of the province, and ye who are in this house (itself), this village, tribe, and 
province]; yea, in those which are ours, Mazdayasnians, who are steadfast in our worship, 
who appear with our wood-billets and our perfumes, and with our supplicated blessings 
[(Pazand) for so may they be to us, the more full of wisest teaching].


VISPERAD 13.
------------
1.	According to the ritual we worship Ahura Mazda; according to the ritual we worship the 
Bountiful Immortals; and we sacrifice to the sacrificial word correctly spoken, and to every 
Mathra (as to a sacred word of reason). And we sacrifice to Zarathushtra, him who is 
especially the possessor of the Mathra; and we sacrifice to the 'blessings for the saints'; and 
we worship the 'hail' addressed to the Bountiful Immortals.
2.	Also we worship the three principal (chapters) uttered (in the Yasna) without addition or 
omission; and we worship the three principal ones without addition or omission; we worship 
the three commencing ones entire without addition or omission. And we worship the entirety 
of the three principal ones without addition or omission; and their Has, their metrical lines, 
their words, and their word structure [and their recital, memorizing, chanting, and their 
steadfast offering].


VISPERAD 14.
------------
1.	(We worship Ahura Mazda, the holy Lord of the ritual order; and we sacrifice to the Gatha 
Ahunavaiti) with its measures, and word-structure, and its Zand, with its questions and 
counter-questions, with its words and its metric feet. And we sacrifice to these as well-recited, 
and now in the course of being recited, as well-worshipped, and now in the course of being 
used in worship. 2. (Yea, we sacrifice to it) in its own 'wisdom;, in its own 'clearness', in its 
own 'loving intention', in its sovereignty, and its own ritual order, and its 'acquired boon', 
which is also that given by Ahura Mazda for the promotion of piety, for that thought which 
originates from the 'heart-devoted self'.
3.	Also we worship the Ahuna-vairya, the holy lord of the ritual order, the holy lord with its 
Ahu and its Ratu [(Pazand); for He is the one with the title Ahu and Ratu, who is Ahura 
Mazda]. 4. And we sacrifice to the constituent parts of the Gatha Ahunavaiti, to its chapters, 
and its metrical lines, its words, and word-structure, [and to its heard-recital, and memorized 
recital, its continuous and its steadfast offering].


VISPERAD 15.
------------
1.	Hold your feet in readiness, and your two hands, and your understandings, O ye 
Zarathushtrian Mazdayasnians! for the well-doing of lawful deeds in accordance with the 
sacred Order, and for the avoidance of the unlawful and evil deeds which are contrary to the 
ritual. Let the good deeds for the furtherance of husbandry be done here. Render ye the needy 
rich. 2. Let Sraosha (Obedience) be present here for the worship of Ahura Mazda, the most 
helpful, and the holy, who is so desired by us in the pronunciation, and for the service, and 
the pondering of the Yasna Haptanghaiti, for the heart's devotion to it, for its memorization, 
and its victorious and holy recital (or for the victorious saint), without addition or omission, 
(3) which has been intoned, and which shall yet be uttered as great, powerful, smiting with 
victory, separate from harmful malice, for the pronunciation of victorious words for Ahura 
Mazda's Fire.
4-5.	(=Vr9.6-7.)


VISPERAD 16.
------------
1.	And we worship the Fire here, Ahura Mazda's son, and the Yazads having the seed of fire in 
them, and the Rashnus having the seed of fire in them; and we worship the Fravashis of the 
saints. And we worship Sraosha who smites with victory, and the holy man, and the entire 
creation of the holy (and the clean). 2. And we worship the Blessedness and the Fravashi of 
Zarathushtra Spitama, the saint. And we worship the saints and their blessed Fravashis (as of 
one). And we worship all their Fravashis (as considered each apart), and those of the saints 
within the Province, and those of the saints without the Province, yea, we worship the 
Fravashis of holy men and holy women (wherever they may be, those devoted to the Order 
of the Faith). And we sacrifice to those whose (service) for us in the Yasna Ahura Mazda, the 
holy, has known as the better, and of these Zarathushtra is the living chief and master. And 
we sacrifice to the fields and the waters, the lands and the plants, and to the constituent parts 
of the Yasna Haptanghaiti, its chapters, its metered lines, its words, and word structure.


VISPERAD 17.
------------
1.	And we strive after the good thoughts, words, and deeds inculcated in the Yasna Haptanghaiti. 
A blessing is the Right (called) the Best, (there is) weal; (there is) weal for this (man) when 
toward Righteousness Best (there is) right.


VISPERAD 18.
------------
1.	We worship Ahura Mazda with the ushta. And we worship the Amesha Spenta with the ushta, 
and the holy man, the saint. And we worship the prior world of the holy (and of the clean) 
with an ushta, and the state of weal and salvation for the holy man (the saint).
2.	And we worship that life-long state of blessedness (for the holy) which is the evil man's 
calamity; yea, we worship his eternal salvation, and with the salvation prayer. And we 
sacrifice to every saint who exists, who is now coming into existence, and who shall exist in 
future.


VISPERAD 19.
------------
1.	We worship Ahura Mazda the bountiful; and we worship the Bountiful Immortals (saying the 
Spenta). And we sacrifice to the bountiful saint, and to the bountiful anticipative 
understanding Also we sacrifice to the good and bountiful Armaiti (the ready mind). And we 
worship her together with the bountiful creatures in the creation of the pure. And we sacrifice 
to the holy creatures who have intelligence as their first, (to those foremost in their mind). 
And we worship the omniscient understanding, and Him who is Ahura Mazda (Himself). 2. 
And we sacrifice to the shining sun, which is the highest of the high; yea, we worship the sun 
together with the Bountiful Immortals, and the Mathras with their good ceremonies. Also we 
sacrifice to the glorious achievements, and to this glory (which we have gained). And we 
sacrifice to the herds which have the Fire and its blessings. Also we worship the holy benefit 
which is so widely diffused, and that wisdom which is the bounteous Armaiti, whose are the 
laws of the Righteous Order, and of those holy creatures who have Righteousness as their 
first.


VISPERAD 20.
------------
1.	(Homage to the Gatha Vohu-khshathra! We sacrifice to the Vohu-khshathra), (the good 
kingdom) even the Khshathra-vairya, the kingdom to be desired; and we sacrifice to the iron-
founding, and to the (sacrificial) words correctly spoken which smite (the foe) with victory, 
and which hold the Daevas subject.
And we worship that reward and that health, that healing and that progress, that growth and 
that victorious smiting (2) which are between the Vohu-khshathra and the Vahishtoishti, (and 
which are acquired by us) by the memorized recital of the good thoughts, good words, and 
good deeds, for the withstanding of evil thoughts, and words, and deeds; yea, for the undoing 
of all treacherous thoughts (directed) against me, and of all false words, and unfair deeds. 3. 
[And we sacrifice to the later Yasna, the heroic Haptanghaiti, (and which as it recurs 
becomes) the holy ritual chief.]


VISPERAD 21.
------------
1.	We strive earnestly, and we take up our Yasna and our homage to the good waters, and to the 
fertile fruit-trees (which bear as of themselves), and to the Fravashis of the saints; yea, we 
take up our Yasna, and our homage earnestly to those beings which are (so) good, the waters, 
and the trees, and the Fravashis of the saints, (2) and to the Kine, and to Gaya (Maretan), 
and to the Mathra Spenta (the bounteous word-of-reason), the holy, which works (within and 
for us with effect), to these we take up our Yasnas and our homage with earnest zeal, and to 
Thee, O Ahura Mazda I and to thee, O Zarathushtra, we do the same; and to thee, O lofty 
lord (the Apam-napat), and to the Bountiful Immortals. 3. And we sacrifice to the listening 
(that hears our prayers) and to that mercy, and to the hearing of (our spoken) homage, and 
to that mercy which is (shown in response to our offered) praise. And we sacrifice to the 
fraraiti vidushe, which is contained in the piece hvadaenaish ashaonis; and we sacrifice to 'the 
good praise which is without hypocrisy, and which has no malice (as its end)'; and we sacrifice 
to the later Yasna and to its offering; and we sacrifice to the chapters of the later Yasna, and 
to its metrical lines, its words, and word-structure.


VISPERAD 22.
------------
1.	With this chant (fully) chanted, and which is for the Bountiful Immortals and the holy 
Saoshyants (who are the prophets who shall serve us), and by means of these (ceremonial) 
actions, which are (of all) the best, we desire to utter our supplications for the Kine. It is that 
chant which the saint has recognized as good and fruitful of blessed gifts, and which the sinner 
does not know. May we never reach that (ill-luck that the sinner) may outstrip us (in our 
chanting), not in the matter of a plan (thought out), or of words (delivered), or ceremonies 
(done), nor yet in any offering whatever when he (?) approaches (us for harm).


VISPERAD 23.
------------
1.	We worship Ahura Mazda as the best (worship to be offered in our gifts). We worship the 
Amesha Spenta (once more, and as) the best. We worship Asha Vahishta (who is 
Righteousness the Best). And we sacrifice to those (prayers) which are evident as the best; 
that is, the Praises of the Yasnas.
Also we sacrifice to that best wish, which is that of Asha Vahishta, and we worship Heaven, 
which is the best world of the saints, bright and all glorious; and we sacrifice likewise to that 
best approach which leads to it. 2. And we sacrifice to that reward, health, healing, 
furtherance, and increase, and to that victory which is within the two, the Ahuna-vairya and 
the Airyema-ishyo, through the memorized recital of the good thoughts, words, and deeds 
(which they enjoin).

