Surah 58

Al Mujadilah (The Woman Who Pleads)


In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.

1.  Allah has indeed heard (and accepted) the statement of the woman who pleads with thee concerning her husband and carries her complaint (in prayer) to Allah: and Allah (always) hears the arguments between both sides among you: for Allah hears and sees (all things).

2.  If any men among you divorce their wives by Zihar (calling them mothers), they cannot be their mothers: none can be their mothers except those who gave them birth.  And in fact they use words (both) iniquitous and false: but truly Allah is one that blots out (sins),and forgives (again and again).

3.  But those who divorce their wives by Zihar, then wish to go back on the words they uttered, (it is ordained that such a one) should free a slave before they touch each other: this are ye admonished to perform: and Allah is well-acquainted with (all) that ye do.

4.  And if any has not (the wherewithal), he should fast for two months consecutively before they touch each other.  But if any is unable to do so, he should feed sixty indigent ones.  This, that ye may show your faith in Allah and His Messenger.  Those are limits (set by) Allah.  For those who Reject (Him), there is a grievous Penalty.

5.  Those who resist Allah and His Messenger will be humbled to dust, as were those before them: for We have already sent down clear Signs.  And the Unbelievers (will have) a humiliating Penalty, .

6.  On the Day that Allah will raise them all up (again) and show them the truth (and meaning) of their conduct.  Allah has reckoned its (value), though they may have forgotten it: for Allah is Witness to all things.

7.  Seest thou not that Allah doth know (all) that is in the heavens and on earth?  There is not a secret consultation between three, but He makes the fourth among them, nor between five but He makes the sixth, nor between fewer nor more, but He is in their midst wheresoever they be: in the end will He tell them the truth of their conduct, on the Day of Judgment for Allah has full knowledge of all things.

8.  Turnest thou not thy sight towards those who were forbidden secret counsels yet revert to that which they were forbidden (to do)?  And they hold secret counsels among themselves for iniquity and hostility, and disobedience to the Messenger.  And when they come to thee, they salute thee, not as Allah salutes thee, (but in crooked ways): and they say to themselves, "Why does not Allah punish us for our words?"  Enough for them is Hell: in it will they burn, and evil is that destination!

9.  O ye who believe! when ye hold secret counsel, do it not for iniquity and hostility, and disobedience to the Prophet; but do it for righteousness and self-restraint; and fear Allah, to whom ye shall be brought back.

10.  Secret counsels are only (inspired) by the Evil One, in order that he may cause grief to the Believers; but he cannot harm them in the least, except as Allah permits; and on Allah let the Believers put their trust.

11.  O ye who believe!  When ye are told to make room in the assemblies, (spread out and) make room: (Ample) room will Allah provide for you.  And when ye are told to rise up, rise up: Allah will raise up, to (suitable) ranks (and degrees), those of you who believe and who have been granted Knowledge: and Allah is well-acquainted with all ye do.

12.  O ye who believe!  When ye consult the Messenger in private, spend something in charity before your private consultation.  That will be best for you, and most conducive to purity (of conduct).  But if ye find not (the wherewithal), Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

13.  Is it that ye are afraid of spending sums in charity before your private consultation (with him)?  If, then ye do not so, and Allah forgives you, then (at least) establish regular prayer; practice regular charity; and obey Allah and His Messenger: and Allah is well-acquainted will all that ye do.

14.  Turnest thou not thy attention to those who turn (in friendship) to such as have the Wrath of Allah upon them?  They are neither of you nor of them, and they swear to falsehood knowingly.

15.  Allah has prepared for them a severe Penalty: evil indeed are their deeds.

16.  They have made their oaths a screen (for their misdeeds): Thus they obstruct (men) from the Path of Allah: therefore shall they have a humiliating Penalty.

17.  Of no profit whatever to them, against Allah, will be their riches nor their sons: They will be Companions of the Fire, to dwell therein (for aye)!

18.  One day will Allah raise them all up (for Judgment): then will they swear to Him as they swear to you: and they think that they have something (to stand upon): No, indeed! they are but liars!

19.  The Evil One has got the better of them: So he has made them lose the remembrance of Allah.  They are the Party of the Evil One.  Truly, it is the Party of the Evil One that will perish!

20.  Those who resist Allah and His Messenger will be among those most humiliated.

21.  Allah has decreed: "It is I and My Messenger who must prevail": For Allah is One full of strength, able to enforce His Will.

22.  Thou wilt not find any people who believe in Allah and the Last Day, loving those who resist Allah and His Messenger, even though they were their fathers or their sons, or their brothers, or their kindred.  For such He has written Faith in their hearts, and strengthened them with a spirit from Himself.  And He will admit them to Gardens beneath which Rivers flow, to dwell therein (for ever).  Allah will be well pleased with them, and they with Him.  They are the Party of Allah.  Truly it is the Party of Allah, that will achieve Felicity.



