Surah 61

Al Saff (The Battle Array)


In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.

1.  Whatever is in the heavens and on earth, let it declare the Praises and Glory of Allah: for He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise.

2.  O ye who believe! why say ye that which ye do not?

3.  Grievously odious is it in the sight of Allah that ye say that which ye do not.

4.  Truly Allah loves those who fight in His Cause in battle array, as if they were a solid cemented structure.

5.  And remember, Moses said to his people: "O my people! why do ye vex and insult me, though ye know that I am the messenger of Allah (sent) to you?"  Then when they went wrong, Allah let their hearts go wrong: for Allah guides not those who are rebellious transgressors.

6.  And remember, Jesus, the son of Mary, said: "O Children of Israel!  I am the messenger of Allah (sent) to you confirming the Law (which came) before me, and giving glad Tidings of a Messenger to come after me, whose name shall be Ahmad."  But when he came to them with Clear Signs, they said, "This is evident sorcery!"

7.  Who doth greater wrong than one who invents falsehood against Allah, even as he is being invited to Islam?  And Allah guides not those who do wrong.

8.  Their intention is to extinguish Allah's Light (by blowing) with their mouths: but Allah will complete (the revelation of) His Light, even though the Unbelievers may detest (it).

9.  It is He Who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and the Religion of Truth, that he may proclaim it over all religion, even though the Pagans may detest (it).

10.  O ye who believe! shall I lead you to a bargain that will save you from a grievous Penalty?--

11.  That ye believe in Allah and His Messenger, and that ye strive (your utmost) in the Cause of Allah, with your property and your persons: that will be best for you, if ye but knew!

12.  He will forgive you your sins, and admit you to Gardens beneath which rivers flow, and to beautiful mansions in Gardens of Eternity: that is indeed the supreme Achievement.

13.  And another (favor will He bestow), which ye do love--help from Allah and a speedy victory: so give the Glad Tidings to the Believers.

14.  O ye who believe! be ye helpers of Allah: as said Jesus, the son of Mary, to the Disciples, "Who will be my helpers to (the work of) Allah?"  Said the Disciples, "We are Allah's helpers!"  Then a portion of the Children of Israel believed, and a portion disbelieved: but We gave power to those who believed against their enemies, and they became the ones that prevailed.



