Surah 62

Al Jumu'ah (Friday)


In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.

1.  Whatever is in the heavens and on earth, doth declare the Praises and Glory of Allah--the Sovereign, the Holy One, the Exalted in Might, the Wise.

2.  It is He Who has sent amongst the Unlettered a messenger from among themselves, to rehearse to them His Signs, to sanctify them, and to instruct them in Scripture and Wisdom--although they had been, before, in manifest error--

3.  As well as (to confer all these benefits upon) others of them, who have not already joined them: and He is Exalted in Might, Wise.

4.  Such is the Bounty of Allah, which He bestows on whom He will: and Allah is the Lord of the highest bounty.

5.  The similitude of those who were charged with the (obligations of the) Mosaic Law, but who subsequently failed in those (obligations), is that of a donkey which carries huge tomes (but understands them not).  Evil is the similitude of people who falsify the Signs of Allah: and Allah guides not people who do wrong.

6.  Say: "O ye that stand on Judaism! if ye think that ye are friends to Allah, to the exclusion of (other) men, then express your desire for Death, if ye are truthful!"

7.  But never will they express their desire (for Death), because of the (deeds) their hands have sent on before them!  And Allah knows well those that do wrong!

8.  Say: "The Death from which ye flee will truly overtake you: then will ye be sent back to the Knower of things secret and open: and He will tell you (the truth of) the things that ye did!"

9.  O ye who believe! when the call is proclaimed to prayer on Friday (the Day of Assembly), hasten earnestly to the Remembrance of Allah, and leave off business (and traffic): that is best for you if ye but knew!

10.  And when the Prayer is finished, then may ye disperse through the land, and seek of the Bounty of Allah: and celebrate the Praises of Allah often (and without stint): that ye may prosper.

11.  But when they see some bargain or some amusement, they disperse headlong to it, and leave thee standing.  Say: "The (blessing) from the Presence of Allah is better than any amusement or bargain!  And Allah is the Best to provide (for all needs)."



