Surah 64

Al Taghabun (The Mutual Loss and Gain)


In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.

1.  Whatever is in the heavens and on earth, doth declare the Praises and Glory of Allah: to Him belongs Dominion, and to Him belongs Praise: and He has power over all things.

2.  It is He Who has created you; and of you are some that are Unbelievers, and some that are Believers: and Allah sees well all that ye do.

3.  He has created the heavens and the earth in just proportions, and has given you shape, and made your shapes beautiful: and to Him is the final Goal.

4.  He knows what is in the heavens and on earth: and He knows what ye conceal and what ye reveal: yes, Allah knows well the (secrets) of (all) hearts.

5.  Has not the story reached you, of those who rejected Faith aforetime?  So they tasted the evil result of their conduct; and they had a grievous Penalty.

6.  That was because there came to them messengers with Clear Signs, but they said: "Shall (mere) human beings direct us?"  So they rejected (the Message) and turned away.  But Allah can do without (them): and Allah is free of all needs, worthy of all praise.

7.  The Unbelievers think that they will not be raised up (for Judgment).  Say: "Yea, by my Lord, ye shall surely be raised up: then shall ye be told (the truth) of all that ye did.  And that is easy for Allah."

8.  Believe, therefore, in Allah and His Messenger, and in the Light which We have sent down.  And Allah is well-acquainted with all that ye do.

9.  The Day that He assembles you (all) for a day of Assembly--that will be a day of mutual loss and gain (among you).  And those who believe in Allah and work righteousness--He will remove from them their ills, and He will admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever: that will be the Supreme Achievement.

10.  But those who reject Faith and treat Our Signs as falsehoods, they will be Companions of the Fire, to dwell therein for aye: and evil is that Goal.

11.  No kind of calamity can occur, except by the leave of Allah: and if anyone believes in Allah, (Allah) guides his heart (aright): for Allah knows all things.

12.  So obey Allah, and obey His Messenger; but if ye turn back, the duty of Our Messenger is but to proclaim (the Message) clearly and openly.

13.  Allah! there is no god but He: and on Allah, therefore, let the Believers put their trust.

14.  O ye who believe! truly, among your wives and your children are (some that are) enemies to yourselves: so beware of them!  But if ye forgive and overlook, and cover up (their faults), verily Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

15.  Your riches and your children may be but a trial: but in the Presence of Allah, is the highest Reward.

16.  So fear Allah as much as ye can; listen and obey; and spend in charity for the benefit of your own souls: and those saved from the covetousness of their own souls--they are the ones that achieve prosperity.

17.  If ye loan to Allah a beautiful loan, He will double it to your (credit), and He will grant you Forgiveness: for Allah is most Ready to appreciate (service), Most Forbearing--

18.  Knower of what is hidden and what is open, exalted in Might, Full of Wisdom.



