Extracts from Messages Written by 
the Universal House of Justice on the Four Year Plan
Related to Training Institutes


During the Nine Year Plan, the Universal House of Justice called upon National Spiritual Assemblies in countries where large-scale expansion was taking place to establish teaching institutes to meet the deepening needs of the thousands who were entering the Faith.  At that time, the emphasis was on acquiring a physical facility to which group after group of newly enrolled believers would be invited to attend deepening courses.  Over the years, in conjunction with these institutes, and often independent of them, a number of courses -- referred to, for example, as weekend institutes, five-day institutes, and nine-day institutes -- were developed for the purpose of helping the friends gain an understanding of the fundamental verities of the Faith and arise to serve it.  These efforts have contributed significantly to the enriching of the spiritual life of the believers and will undoubtedly continue in the future.

With the growth in the number of enrolments, it has become apparent that such occasional courses of instruction and the informal activities of community life, though important, are not sufficient as a means of human resource development, for they have resulted in only a relatively small band of active supporters of the Cause.  These believers, no matter how dedicated, no matter how willing to make sacrifices, cannot attend to the needs of hundreds, much less thousands, of fledgling local communities.  Systematic attention has to be given by Baha'i institutions to training a significant number of believers and assisting them in serving the Cause according to their God-given talents and capacities.

The development of human resources on a large scale requires that the establishment of institutes be viewed in a new light.  In many regions, it has become imperative to create institutes as organizational structures dedicated to systematic training.  The purpose of such training is to endow ever-growing contingents of believers with the spiritual insights, the knowledge, and the skills needed to carry out the many tasks of accelerated expansion and consolidation, including the teaching and deepening of a large number of people -- adults, youth and children.  This purpose can best be achieved through well-organized, formal programmes consisting of courses that follow appropriately designed curricula.

As an agency of the National Spiritual Assembly, the training institute should be charged with the task of developing human resources in all or part of a country.  The requirements of expansion and consolidation in the country or region will dictate the complexity of its organization.  In some instances, the institute may consist of a group of dedicated believers with a well-defined programme and some administrative arrangement that enables it to offer regular training courses.  In many cases, in addition to a group of teachers associated with it, the institute will require part- and full-time staff, for whom assistance from the funds of the Faith may be necessary.  The institute needs access to some physical facilities in which it can conduct courses and, at some stage of its development, may require a building of its own.  Irrespective of whether or not an institute has its own physical facilities, its teachers must offer courses both at a central location and in the villages and towns so that an appreciable number of believers can enter its programmes.  The complexity and number of courses offered by an institute, as well as the size of its staff and the pool of teachers from which it draws, may call for the appointment of a board to direct its affairs.  When the region under the influence of an institute is large, it may have branches serving specific areas, each with its own administration.

For the new thrust in the establishment of institutes to succeed, the active involvement of the Counsellors and Auxiliary Board members in their operation is essential.  Such involvement will help the Counsellors to kindle "the Fire of the Love of God in the very hearts and souls of His servants", "to diffuse the Divine Fragrances", "to edify the souls of men", "to promote learning", and "to improve the character of all men".  These institutes will provide the Counsellors and Auxiliary Board members with immediate access to a formal means of educating the believers, in addition to other avenues available to them such as conferences, summer schools, and meetings with the friends.  Institutes should be regarded as centres of learning, and since their character harmonizes with, and provides scope for the exercise of, the educational responsibilities of the Auxiliary Board members, we have decided that intimate involvement in institute operations should now become a part of the evolving functions of these officers of the Faith.  The Counsellors and National Spiritual Assemblies will need to consult on the details of the collaboration between the two arms of the Administrative Order in overseeing the budget and functioning of an institute and in planning programme content, developing curricula, and delivering courses.  If a board of directors is named, its membership should be decided upon by the National Spiritual Assembly in consultation with the Counsellors and with their full support; Auxiliary Board members may serve on these bodies.

In addition to having a working relationship with Auxiliary Board members, the institute must necessarily collaborate closely with Local Assemblies and committees in charge of administering plans and projects of expansion and consolidation.  This will ensure that the institute's programmes are designed to help raise up individuals who can contribute effectively to such plans.  However, even if these administrative bodies have not yet developed the capacity to utilize the talents of those being trained, the programmes of the institute should be regularly carried out.  After all, the strengthening of the institutions in a region depends, as do all other matters, on skilled and confirmed supporters of the Faith.

In developing its programmes, the institute should draw on the talents of a growing number of believers and should also take advantage of its institutional links to have access to resources worldwide.  A newly established institute will often utilize materials created by institutes in other parts of the world.  Gradually, those designing and delivering courses will learn how these materials might be supplemented to better suit their specific needs and will decide what new ones should be created.  The curriculum of the institute at any given time, then, may well use a combination of materials created locally and those that have proven successful elsewhere.  As institutes begin to flourish, a wide variety of curricula will be developed for various training needs.  We hope that, with the assistance of the International Teaching Centre, you will be able to assess the materials available from time to time and help the institutes in the communities you serve to select those most appropriate for their needs.

We are placing at the disposal of the Teaching Centre funds specifically designated for the operation of institutes and intend to call on National Spiritual Assemblies, according to their circumstances, to pay particular attention to the development of institutes in their countries.  It is our hope that significant progress in this direction will constitute one of the distinguishing features of the Four Year Plan.
(Message dated 26 December 1995 to the Conference of the Continental Boards of Counsellors)


The development of human resources to meet the needs of a rapidly expanding community.  Large-scale growth necessitates sustained measures of consolidation.  The urgent requirement is for formally conducted programmes of training through institutes and other centres of learning, in the establishment and operation of which the Counsellors and Auxiliary Board members will become more intimately involved.
(Message dated 31 December 1995 to the Baha'is of the World)


To effect the possibilities of expansion and consolidation implied by entry by troops, a determined, worldwide effort to develop human resources must be made.  The endeavour of individuals to conduct study classes in their homes, the sponsorship by the institutions of occasional courses of instruction, and the informal activities of the community, though important, are not adequate for the education and training of a rapidly expanding community.  It is there-fore of paramount importance that systematic attention be given to devising methods for educating large numbers of believers in the fundamental verities of the Faith and for training and assisting them to serve the Cause as their God-given talents allow.  There should be no delay in establishing permanent institutes designed to provide well-organized, formally conducted programmes of training on a regular schedule.  Access of the institute to physical facilities will of course be necessary, but it may not require a building of its own.

This matter calls for an intensification of the collaboration between the Continental Counsellors and National Spiritual Assemblies.  For the success of these training institutes will depend in very large measure on the active involvement of the Continental Counsellors and the Auxiliary Board members in their operation.  Particularly will it be necessary for Auxiliary Board members to have a close working relationship with institutes and, of course, with the Local Spiritual Assemblies whose communities will benefit from institute programmes.  Since institutes are to be regarded as centres of learning, and since their character harmonizes with, and provides scope for the exercise of, the educational responsibilities of the Auxiliary Board members, the intimate involvement in institute operations should now become a part of the evolving functions of these officers of the Faith.  Drawing on the talents and abilities of increasing numbers of believers will also be crucial to the development and execution of institute programmes.

As the term "institute" has assumed various uses in the Baha'i community, a word of clarification is needed.  The next four years will represent an extraordinary period in the history of our Faith, a turning point of epochal magnitude.  What the friends throughout the world are now being asked to do is to commit themselves, their material resources, their abilities and their time to the development of a network of training institutes on a scale never before attempted.  These centres of Baha'i learning will have as their goal one very practical outcome, namely, the raising up of large numbers of believers who are trained to foster and facilitate the process of entry by troops with efficiency and love.
"Centre your energies in the propagation of the Faith of God," Baha'u'llah thus instructs His servants, adding, "Whoso is worthy of so high a calling, let him arise and promote it.  Whoso is unable, it is his duty to appoint him who will, in his stead, proclaim this Revelation...."  Just as one deputizes another to teach in one's stead by covering the expenses of a pioneer or travelling teacher, one can deputize a teacher serving an institute, who is, of course, a teacher of teachers.  To do so, one may make contributions to the Continental Baha'i Fund, as well as to the Local, National and International Funds, earmarked for this purpose.
(Ridvan 1996 message to the Baha'is of the World)


You will readily appreciate, then, the emphasis placed on multiplying the number of training institutes; for without them it will be impossible to meet the needs of hugely expanding communities.  In some places, the friends may find it possible to offer sites and facilities for these essential operations, which must be located in as many areas as necessary to provide regular and well-organized training to increasing numbers of believers.  The programmes of the institutes must be designed to instil in the participants a good understanding of the fundamental verities of the Faith and to help them acquire skills and abilities that will enable them to serve the Faith effectively.
(Ridvan 1996 message to the Followers of Baha'u'llah in Africa) 


The establishment of training institutes in various locations is emphasized in the Four Year Plan because current methods, valuable though they are, are not adequate by themselves to meet the challenges of this new stage in the growth of the Cause.  The character and structure of the training institutes must be adapted to the conditions of each country and region; clearly their form in Europe will not be identical with that of training institutes in the rural areas of India.  Their essential functions, however, will be the same.  They will foster a firm acceptance of Baha'i identity in those who take part: the capacity to look upon the world and its conditions from the point of view of the Teachings rather than from the standpoint of one's nationality or non-Baha'i background.  They will help to develop in each participant a deep love for Baha'u'llah, a good understanding of His essential Teachings and an awareness of the importance of developing the spiritual life of each individual through prayer, meditation and immersion in the Sacred Writings.  They will also cover such practical matters as how to teach the Faith, for there are too many who, for lack of confidence in their ability to do so, are hesitant to convey the Message.  The transformation that such deepening in the Faith produces will surely inflame the hearts of the individual friends with the longing to share this Message with those around them, and this is the seed of all success in teaching.  Those who have attended training institutes will be able to help the other Baha'is, new and old, to increase their potential for teaching, and so to greatly increase the human resources of the Cause, in which every believer is a teacher.
(Ridvan 1996 message to the Followers of Baha'u'llah in Europe) 


Plans focusing on these areas of large-scale expansion will necessarily seek to mobilize an appreciable number of believers within each population not only to labour diligently in their own local communities, but also to serve as long- and short-term pioneers and visiting teachers in other localities.  Training programmes, with which many of your communities have considerable experience, constitute a most potent instrument for the accomplishment of such a vast mobilization.  We call upon you, then, to support the work of the training institutes in your countries, the more experienced among you giving generously of their time as teachers so that courses can be offered widely and consistently.  As you acquire new knowledge and skills through these programmes, you will be able to put into practice with enthusiasm and zeal what you have learned, and arise to shoulder the manifold responsibilities that accelerated expansion and consolidation demand.
(Ridvan 1996 message to the Followers of Baha'u'llah in Latin America and the Caribbean) 


Training institutes and other centres of learning are an indispensable element of a sustained endeavour to advance this process, and to ensure that the essential deepening of new believers is not neglected, that they develop the necessary skills to effectively teach the Faith, and that an opportunity is provided for all Baha'is, new and veteran, to embark on a systematic study of the fundamental verities of the Revelation of Baha'u'llah.  We look to your communities to make an energetic response to the call for such institutes, and to develop a wide variety of approaches fitted to the needs of the diverse components of your population.
(Ridvan 1996 message to the Followers of Baha'u'llah in North America:  Alaska, Canada, Greenland and the United States) 


Every country of the region must witness, in the course of the Four Year Plan, a significant advance in the process of entry by troops.  It is essential that the plans formulated on national and local levels reflect this vital aim.  The advancement of this process will require that greater attention be given not only to fostering individual initiative in the teaching work, but also to developing human resources through the establishment and efficient operation of training institutes and other centres of learning, and to vastly increasing the strength and quality of the functioning of the Local Spiritual Assemblies.
(Ridvan 1996 message to the Followers of Baha'u'llah in Australia, the Cook Islands, the Eastern Caroline Islands, the Fiji Islands, French Polynesia, the Hawaiian Islands, Indonesia, Japan, Kiribati, Korea, the Mariana Islands, the Marshall Islands, New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and the Western Caroline Islands) 


Systematic training programmes constitute the most potent instrument at your disposal for realizing the potential of that highly promising region to contribute significantly to the human resources of the Faith.  To this end, the establishment and strengthening of institutes will undoubtedly be a central component of the plans of all your countries.  Your participation in institute programmes, through which you will deepen your knowledge of the Faith, cultivate your inner spiritual lives and develop abilities of service, will enable you to intensify your individual and collective exertions in the teaching field and will result in a commensurate acceleration in the expansion of your communities.  Varying patterns of growth, of course, will evolve according to the particular conditions in each country.
(Ridvan 1996 message to the Followers of Baha'u'llah in Cambodia, Hong Kong, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Macau, Malaysia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam) 


Your past exploits were largely the result of the incessant labours of a comparatively few consecrated believers who devoted their time and resources to the spread of the Cause in locality after locality.  If you are to sustain rapid expansion and consolidation in the coming years, it is imperative that far greater numbers of dedicated and committed souls arise to promote these twin processes.  Training courses -- widespread, regular and well-organized -- constitute the most effective means to mobilize believers on the scale required.  Depending on the conditions of your countries, such courses will be conducted by teachers associated with national, state or regional institutes, some of which may well have several branches.  Although the programmes of the institutes may vary according to the characteristics of the populations they serve, their essential functions will be the same.  They should seek to develop in the participants a good understanding of Baha'u'llah's essential Teachings and to help them acquire those skills and abilities that will enable them to serve the Faith effectively.  They should also strive to imbue their hearts with a deep love for Baha'u'llah -- a love from which stems a desire to submit oneself to His Will, to obey His laws, to heed His exhortations and to promote His Faith....

Of course, your successes in the teaching field and in the development of local communities will only yield lasting results if you ensure the proper education of children and youth.  Youth will undoubtedly be the most enthusiastic supporters of the programmes of your institutes.  They are eager to make a significant contribution to the progress of their communities and have shown, time and again, their capacity to respond to the call to service.  They can be trained to help shoulder the manifold responsibilities demanded by rapid expansion and consolidation.  But it is especially important for large numbers of them to become capable teachers of Baha'i children's classes.  As you are well aware, without the education of children it is impossible to maintain victories from one generation to the next.

All these tasks will require your concentrated attention.  It is important, too, that you maintain the momentum which the activities of social and economic development have gained, especially in India.  Within their own sphere of competence, the specialized institutes, the schools and other projects are each engaged in work critical to the development of human resources.  We hope that those who benefit from such programmes will generously offer their talents to the institutions of the Faith in furthering the interests of the Four Year Plan.
(Ridvan 1996 message to the Followers of Baha'u'llah in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Bangladesh, India, Nepal and Sri Lanka) 


In these republics, through the combined efforts of native and visiting teachers, extraordinary advances can be expected.  A pattern for the rapid growth of the Cause has already been established in the region:  locality after locality has been opened to the Faith and, because of the high receptivity of the people, the number of believers in each place has quickly risen, resulting in the election of a Spiritual Assembly to guide the affairs of the nascent community.  Integral to this pattern, almost from the very outset, has been the holding of regular institute courses, which have assisted the friends in becoming strong promoters of the Cause.  If the expansion and consolidation activities are vigorously pursued according to this same pattern in the coming years, the growth of the Faith will accelerate, greatly increasing the number of believers and centres.
(Ridvan 1996 message to the Followers of Baha'u'llah in Western and Central Asia)
