Sacred Texts  Sikhism  Index  Previous  Next  

Shri Guru Granth Sahib: So Dar
Section 02 - So Dar - Part 001
In the realm of humility, the Word is Beauty.
Forms of incomparable beauty are fashioned there.
These things cannot be described.
One who tries to speak of these shall regret the attempt.
The intuitive consciousness, intellect and understanding of the mind are shaped there.
The consciousness of the spiritual warriors and the Siddhas, the beings of spiritual perfection, are shaped there. ||36||
In the realm of karma, the Word is Power.
No one else dwells there,
except the warriors of great power, the spiritual heroes.
They are totally fulfilled, imbued with the Lord's Essence.
Myriads of Sitas are there, cool and calm in their majestic glory.
Their beauty cannot be described.
Neither death nor deception comes to those,
within whose minds the Lord abides.
The devotees of many worlds dwell there.
They celebrate; their minds are imbued with the True Lord.
In the realm of Truth, the Formless Lord abides.
Having created the creation, He watches over it. By His Glance of Grace, He bestows happiness.
There are planets, solar systems and galaxies.
If one speaks of them, there is no limit, no end.
There are worlds upon worlds of His Creation.
As He commands, so they exist.
He watches over all, and contemplating the creation, He rejoices.
O Nanak, to describe this is as hard as steel! ||37||
Let self-control be the furnace, and patience the goldsmith.
Let understanding be the anvil, and spiritual wisdom the tools.
With the Fear of God as the bellows, fan the flames of tapa, the body's inner heat.
In the crucible of love, melt the Nectar of the Name,
and mint the True Coin of the Shabad, the Word of God.
Such is the karma of those upon whom He has cast His Glance of Grace.
O Nanak, the Merciful Lord, by His Grace, uplifts and exalts them. ||38||
Shalok:
Air is the Guru, Water is the Father, and Earth is the Great Mother of all.
Day and night are the two nurses, in whose lap all the world is at play.
Good deeds and bad deeds-the record is read out in the Presence of the Lord of Dharma.
According to their own actions, some are drawn closer, and some are driven farther away.
Those who have meditated on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and departed after having worked by the sweat of their brows
-O Nanak, their faces are radiant in the Court of the Lord, and many are saved along with them! ||1||
So Dar ~ That Door. Raag Aasaa, First Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Where is That Door of Yours, and where is That Home, in which You sit and take care of all?
The Sound-current of the Naad vibrates there for You, and countless musicians play all sorts of instruments there for You.
There are so many Ragas and musical harmonies to You; so many minstrels sing hymns of You.
Wind, water and fire sing of You. The Righteous Judge of Dharma sings at Your Door.
Chitr and Gupt, the angels of the conscious and the subconscious who keep the record of actions, and the Righteous Judge of Dharma who reads this record, sing of You.
Shiva, Brahma and the Goddess of Beauty, ever adorned by You, sing of You.
Indra, seated on His Throne, sings of You, with the deities at Your Door.
The Siddhas in Samaadhi sing of You; the Saadhus sing of You in contemplation.
Section 02 - So Dar - Part 002
The celibates, the fanatics, and the peacefully accepting sing of You; the fearless warriors sing of You.
The Pandits, the religious scholars who recite the Vedas, with the supreme sages of all the ages, sing of You.
The Mohinis, the enchanting heavenly beauties who entice hearts in paradise, in this world, and in the underworld of the subconscious, sing of You.
The celestial jewels created by You, and the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, sing of You.
The brave and mighty warriors sing of You. The spiritual heroes and the four sources of creation sing of You.
The worlds, solar systems and galaxies, created and arranged by Your Hand, sing of You.
They alone sing of You, who are pleasing to Your Will. Your devotees are imbued with Your Sublime Essence.
So many others sing of You, they do not come to mind. O Nanak, how can I think of them all?
That True Lord is True, forever True, and True is His Name.
He is, and shall always be. He shall not depart, even when this Universe which He has created departs.
He created the world, with its various colors, species of beings, and the variety of Maya.
Having created the creation, He watches over it Himself, by His Greatness.
He does whatever He pleases. No one can issue any order to Him.
He is the King, the King of kings, the Supreme Lord and Master of kings. Nanak remains subject to His Will. ||1||
Aasaa, First Mehl:
Hearing of His Greatness, everyone calls Him Great.
But just how Great His Greatness is-this is known only to those who have seen Him.
His Value cannot be estimated; He cannot be described.
Those who describe You, Lord, remain immersed and absorbed in You. ||1||
O my Great Lord and Master of Unfathomable Depth, You are the Ocean of Excellence.
No one knows the extent or the vastness of Your Expanse. ||1||Pause||
All the intuitives met and practiced intuitive meditation.
All the appraisers met and made the appraisal.
The spiritual teachers, the teachers of meditation, and the teachers of teachers
-they cannot describe even an iota of Your Greatness. ||2||
All Truth, all austere discipline, all goodness,
all the great miraculous spiritual powers of the Siddhas
-without You, no one has attained such powers.
They are received only by Your Grace. No one can block them or stop their flow. ||3||
What can the poor helpless creatures do?
Your Praises are overflowing with Your Treasures.
Those, unto whom You give-how can they think of any other?
O Nanak, the True One embellishes and exalts. ||4||2||
Aasaa, First Mehl:
Chanting it, I live; forgetting it, I die.
It is so difficult to chant the True Name.
If someone feels hunger for the True Name,
that hunger shall consume his pain. ||1||
How can I forget Him, O my mother?
True is the Master, True is His Name. ||1||Pause||
Trying to describe even an iota of the Greatness of the True Name,
people have grown weary, but they have not been able to evaluate it.
Even if everyone were to gather together and speak of Him,
He would not become any greater or any lesser. ||2||
That Lord does not die; there is no reason to mourn.
He continues to give, and His Provisions never run short.
This Virtue is His alone; there is no other like Him.
There never has been, and there never will be. ||3||
As Great as You Yourself are, O Lord, so Great are Your Gifts.

Next: So Purakh
