BAHIYYIH KHANUM 
     (World Centre, 1982) 
     FILENAME:  BK.FN
     FILEDATE:  08-06-94 

 
v  
 
     He is the Eternal!  This is My testimony for her who 
hath heard My voice and drawn nigh unto Me.  Verily, 
she is a leaf that hath sprung from this preexistent Root.  
She hath revealed herself in My name and tasted of the 
sweet savours of My holy, My wondrous pleasure.  At 
one time We gave her to drink from My honeyed 
Mouth, at another caused her to partake of My mighty, 
My luminous &Kawthar.  Upon her rest the glory of My 
name and the fragrance of My shining robe.  
 
     (&Baha'u'llah's original Arabic of the above is inscribed 
around the circular dome of the Greatest Holy Leaf's monument 
on Mount Carmel.  See illustration between pages 92 and 
93.)  
 
+P1 
                           I 
                  From the Writings of 
                     &BAHA'U'LLAH 
 
+P2 
 
+P3 
 
                            I 
                  From the Writings of 
                      &BAHA'U'LLAH 
 
     1.  Let these exalted words be thy love-song on 
the tree of &Baha, O thou most holy and resplendent 
Leaf:  `God, besides Whom is none other God, the 
Lord of this world and the next!'  Verily, We have 
elevated thee to the rank of one of the most 
distinguished among thy sex, and granted thee, in 
My court, a station such as none other woman hath 
surpassed.  Thus have We preferred thee and raised 
thee above the rest, as a sign of grace from Him Who 
is the Lord of the throne on high and earth below.  
We have created thine eyes to behold the light of My 
countenance, thine ears to hearken unto the melody 
of My words, thy body to pay homage before My 
throne.  Do thou render thanks unto God, thy Lord, 
the Lord of all the world.  
     How high is the testimony of the &Sadratu'l-Muntaha 
for its leaf; how exalted the witness of the Tree 
of Life unto its fruit!  Through My remembrance of 
her a fragrance laden with the perfume of musk hath 
been diffused; well is it with him that hath inhaled it 
and exclaimed:  `All praise be to Thee, O God, my 
 
+P4 
Lord the most glorious!'  How sweet thy presence 
before Me; how sweet to gaze upon thy face, to 
bestow upon thee My loving-kindness, to favour 
thee with My tender care, to make mention of thee 
in this, My Tablet--a Tablet which I have ordained 
as a token of My hidden and manifest grace unto 
thee.  
 
     2.  O My Leaf!  Hearken thou unto My Voice:  
Verily there is none other God but Me, the 
Almighty, the All-Wise.  I can well inhale from thee 
the fragrance of My love and the sweet-smelling 
savour wafting from the raiment of My Name, the 
Most Holy, the Most Luminous.  Be astir upon 
God's Tree in conformity with thy pleasure and 
unloose thy tongue in praise of thy Lord amidst all 
mankind.  Let not the things of the world grieve 
thee.  Cling fast unto this divine Lote-Tree from  
which God hath graciously caused thee to spring 
forth.  I swear by My life!  It behoveth the lover to be 
closely joined to the loved one, and here indeed is the 
Best-Beloved of the world.  
 
+P5  
                      II 
              From the Writings of 
                 &ABDU'L-BAHA 
 
+P6 
 
+P7 
                      II 
              From the Writings of 
                 &ABDU'L-BAHA 
 
     1.  O my well-beloved, deeply spiritual sister!  
Day and night thou livest in my memory.  Whenever 
I remember thee my heart swelleth with sadness and 
my regret groweth more intense.  Grieve not, for I 
am thy true, thy unfailing comforter.  Let neither 
despondency nor despair becloud the serenity of thy 
life or restrain thy freedom.  These days shall pass 
away.  We will, please God, in the &Abha Kingdom 
and beneath the sheltering shadow of the Blessed 
Beauty, forget all these our earthly cares and will 
find each one of these base calumnies amply compensated 
by His expressions of praise and favour.  
From the beginning of time sorrow and anxiety, 
regret and tribulation, have always been the lot of
every loyal servant of God.  Ponder this in thine 
heart and consider how very true it is.  Wherefore, 
set thine heart on the tender mercies of the Ancient 
Beauty and be thou filled with abiding joy and 
intense gladness....  
 
     2.  O thou my affectionate sister!  In the daytime 
and in the night-season my thoughts ever turn 
 
+P8 
to thee.  Not for one moment do I cease to remember 
thee.  My sorrow and regret concern not myself; 
they centre around thee.  Whenever I recall thine 
afflictions, tears that I cannot repress rain down 
from mine eyes....  
 
     3.  Dear and deeply spiritual sister!  At morn and 
eventide, with the utmost ardour and humility, I 
supplicate at the Divine Threshold, and offer this, 
my prayer:  
 
          `Grant, O Thou my God, the Compassionate, 
     that that pure and blessed Leaf may be comforted 
     by Thy sweet savours of holiness and sustained by 
     the reviving breeze of Thy loving care and mercy.  
     Reinforce her spirit with the signs of Thy Kingdom, 
     and gladden her soul with the testimonies of 
     Thy everlasting dominion.  Comfort, O my God, 
     her sorrowful heart with the remembrance of Thy 
     face, initiate her into Thy hidden mysteries, and 
     inspire her with the revealed splendours of Thy 
     heavenly light.  Manifold are her sorrows, and 
     infinitely grievous her distress.  Bestow continually 
     upon her the favour of Thy sustaining  
     grace and, with every fleeting breath, grant her 
     the blessing of Thy bounty.  Her hopes and 
     expectations are centred in Thee; open Thou to 
     her face the portals of Thy tender mercies and lead 
     her into the ways of Thy wondrous benevolence.  
 
+P9 
     Thou art the Generous, the All-Loving, the 
     Sustainer, the All-Bountiful....'  
 
     4.  Dear sister, beloved of my heart and soul!  
The news of thy safe arrival and pleasant stay in the 
land of Egypt has reached me and filled my heart 
with exceeding gladness.  I am thankful to 
&Baha'u'llah for the good health thou dost enjoy 
and for the happiness He hath imparted to the hearts 
of the loved ones in that land.  Shouldst thou wish to 
know of the condition of this servant of the 
Threshold of the &Abha Beauty, praise be to Him 
for having enabled me to inhale the fragrance of His 
tender mercy and partake of the delights of His 
loving-kindness and blessings.  I am being continually 
reinforced by the energizing rays of His 
grace, and feel upheld by the uninterrupted aid of the 
victorious hosts of His Kingdom.  My physical 
health is also improving.  God be praised that from 
every quarter I receive the glad-tidings of the 
growing ascendancy of the Cause of God, and can 
witness evidences of the increasing influence of its 
spread....
 
     5.  O thou my loving, my deeply spiritual   
sister!  I trust that by the grace and loving-kindness 
of the one true God thou art, and wilt be, kept safe 
and secure beneath the sheltering shadow of the 
Blessed Beauty.  Night and day thy countenance 
 
+P10  
appeareth before mine eyes, and in my mind are 
engraved the traits of thy character....  
 
     6.  To my honoured and distinguished sister do 
thou convey the expression of my heartfelt, my 
intense longing.  Day and night she liveth in my 
remembrance.  I dare make no mention of the 
feelings which separation from her has aroused in 
mine heart; for whatever I should attempt to 
express in writing will assuredly be effaced by the 
tears which such sentiments must bring to mine 
eyes....  
 
     7.  O &Diya!+F1  It is incumbent upon thee, 
throughout the journey, to be a close, a constant 
and cheerful companion to my honoured and distinguished 
sister.  Unceasingly, with the utmost 
vigour and devotion, exert thyself, by day and 
night, to gladden her blessed heart; for all her days 
she was denied a moment of tranquillity.  She was 
astir and restless every hour of her life.  Moth-like 
she circled in adoration round the undying flame of 
the Divine Candle, her spirit ablaze and her heart 
consumed by the fire of His love....  
 
    8.  O thou my affectionate sister!  
God be praised, according to what we hear the 
 
+F1 Daughter of &Abdu'l-Baha.  
 
+P11 
climate in that land hath proved not unfavourable.  It 
is to be hoped that out of the grace of the Blessed 
Beauty thy illness will be completely cured and thou 
wilt return in the best of health, so that once again I 
may gaze upon that wondrous face of thine.  
     Write thou a full account of thy condition by 
every post, for I am most anxious for news of thee.  
Let me know if thou shouldst desire anyone from 
here to come to thee, that I may send the person 
along--even &Munirih--so that thou wilt not be 
homesick.  
     That thou shouldst spend a few days of peace and 
rest, is my dearest wish.  
     We here, God be thanked, are all enjoying the best 
of health.  I have been better lately, and sleeping well 
at night.  Rest assured.  
 
     9.  O my dear sister!  
     Praise be to God, within the sheltering grace of 
the Blessed Beauty, here in the lands of the West a 
breeze hath blown from over the rose-gardens of 
His bestowals, and the hearts of many people have 
been drawn as by a magnet to the &Abha Realm.  
     Whatever hath come to pass is from the confirmations 
of the Beloved; for otherwise, what merit had 
we, or what capacity?  We are as a helpless babe, but 
fed at the breast of heavenly grace.  We are no more 
than weak plants, but we flourish in the spring rain 
of His bestowals.  
 
+P12 
     Wherefore, as a thank-offering for these bounties, 
on a certain day don thy garb to visit the Shrine, the 
&ka'bih of our heart's desire, turn thyself toward Him 
on my behalf, lay down thy head on that sacred 
Threshold, and say:  
 
          O divine Providence!  O Thou forgiving Lord!  
     Sinner though I be, I have no refuge save Thyself.  
     All praise be Thine, that in my wanderings over 
     mountains and plains, my toils and troubles on 
     the seas, Thou hast answered still my cries for 
     help, and confirmed me, and favoured me, and 
     honoured me with service at Thy Threshold.  
          To a feeble ant, Thou hast given Solomon's 
     might.  Thou hast made of a gnat a lion in the 
     thicket of Thy Mercy.  Thou hast bestowed on a 
     drop the swelling waves of the sea, Thou hast 
     carried up a mote to the pinnacles of grace.  
     Whatever was achieved, was made possible 
     through Thee.  Otherwise, what strength did the 
     fragile dust possess, what power did this feeble 
     being have?  
          O divine Providence!  Do not seize us in  our 
     sins, but give us refuge.  Do not look upon our evil 
     ways, but grant forgiveness.  Consider not our 
     just deserts, but open wide Thy door of grace.  
          Thou art the Mighty, the Powerful!  Thou art 
     the Seer, the Knower!  
 
   10.  O my well-beloved sister, O Most Exalted 
Leaf!  
 
+P13 
     Thou didst leave for &Akka to remain but two days 
or so and then return, but now thou hast been gone 
from us for quite a while.  We have stayed behind in 
Haifa, all alone, and it is very difficult to get along.  
We hear that thou art a little indisposed; the Haifa air 
would have been better for thee.  We had everything 
ready in Haifa to receive thee, but in fact, this caused 
thee some difficulty.  There is no way but to endure 
the toil and trouble of God's path.  If thou dost not 
bear these hardships, who would ever bear them?  
     In any case, no matter how things are, come thou 
here today, because my heart is longing for thee.  
 
     11.  O thou my sister, my dear sister!  
     Divine wisdom hath decreed this temporary 
separation, but I long more and more to be with thee 
again.  Patience is called for, and long-suffering, and 
trust in God, and the seeking of His favour.  Since 
thou art there, my mind is completely at rest.  
     In recent days, I have made a plan to visit Egypt, if 
this be God's will.  Do thou, on my behalf, lay thy 
head on the sacred Threshold, and perfume brow and 
hair in the dust of that Door, and ask that I may be 
confirmed in my work; that I may, in return for His 
endless bounties, win, if He will, a drop out of the 
ocean of servitude.  
 
     12.  My sister and beloved of my soul!  
     Here on the slopes of Mount Carmel, by the cave 
 
+P14  
of Elijah, we are thinking of that Most Exalted Leaf, 
and the beloved and handmaids of the Lord.  
     We pass our days in writing and our nights now in 
communion with God, now in bed to overcome 
failing health.  And although, to outward seeming, 
we are absent from you all, and far away, still our 
thoughts are with you always.  
     I can never, never forget thee.  However great the 
distance that separates us, we still feel as though we 
were seated under the same roof, in one and the same 
gathering, for are we not all under the shadow of the 
Tabernacle of God and beneath the canopy of His 
infinite grace and mercy?  
 
     13.  My sister, for a considerable period, that is, 
from the day of &Baha'u'llah's ascension, had        
grown so thin and feeble, and was in such a 
weakened condition from the anguish of her mourning, 
that she was close to breakdown.  
     Although, so far as she was concerned, it was her 
dearest wish to drain her cup and wing her way to 
the realms where the Divine Essence shineth in 
glory, still this servant could not bear to behold her 
in that state.  Then it occurred to me that, God be 
thanked, I have such an unfailing comforter as 
&Jinab-i-Haji,+F1 and it would be well to make him 
my partner in distress.  I therefore determined to 
 
+F1 &Haji &Mirza &Hasan-i-Khurasani (see H. M. Balyuzi, &Abdu'l-Baha, 
+F1 pp. 86, 124).  
 
+P15 
send her to Egypt, to provide her with a change of 
air.  
     Although this will certainly cause thee trouble and 
inconvenience, still, I trust that out of God's bounty, 
it will also bring thee much joy and good cheer.  
 
     14.  O my spiritual sister!  
     Thou didst go away to Haifa, supposedly for only  
three or four days.  Now it becometh apparent that 
the spiritual power of the Shrine hath brought thee 
joy and radiance, and even as a magnet is holding 
thee fast.  Thou surely wouldst remember us as well.  
     Truly the spiritual quality of the holy place, its 
fresh skies and delicate air, its crystal waters and 
sweet plains and charming seascape, and the holy 
breathings from the Kingdom all do mingle in that 
Sacred Fold.  Thou art right to linger there...  
     Kiss the light of the eyes of the company of 
spiritual souls, Shoghi Effendi...  
 
     15.  O my spiritual sister!  
     God be praised, through the Ancient Beauty's  
grace and bounty, we have set foot safe and sound 
upon this shore, and arrived in this town+F1...  
     These coasts were once the place where the 
breezes of God's loving kindness blew, and here in 
this sacred Vale the Son of Spirit+F2 raised up His call 
 
+F1 Tiberias.  
+F2 Jesus.  
 
+P16 
of `Here am I, O Thou My Lord!  Here am I!'  That is 
why we here perceive, from every direction, the 
sweet breathings of holiness.  
     My meaning is, rest thou assured, this servant is 
suffering neither from any trouble, nor hardship, 
nor fatigue.  I am looking after myself, and keeping 
away from all mental preoccupations; all, that is, 
except for one thought, which doth indeed disquiet 
the mind--and that is, God forbid, that thou 
shouldst sorrow.  
     I hope that out of the bestowals and bounties of 
the Ancient Beauty, He will in His grace bring 
comfort to every heart.  
 
     16.  O my affectionate sister!  
     God be praised, through His grace and favour, 
my health and well-being are now restored, but it is 
very hard for me to bear thine absence.  
     We think of thee at all times, here on the slopes of 
this sacred, holy and blessed Mount Carmel, and we 
are being happy on thy behalf...  
 
     17.  O my dear sister!  
     It is quite a while now, since thou hast left us, and 
gone away to Nazareth and Haifa.  This journey hath 
lasted too long.  The weather in &Akka is fine and 
 
+P17 
moderate.  If thou comest back, it will rejoice our 
hearts....  
 
     18.  O my cherished sister!  
     Thou art never absent from my thoughts.  
     I speak of thee and call thee to mind at all times.  It 
is my hope that out of God's favour and grace thou 
dost keep safe and well, and dost visit the two Sacred 
Thresholds on my behalf.  
 
     19.  O my sister in the spirit, and the companion    
of my heart!  
     God willing, the climate of Haifa hath proved 
favourable.  I hope that out of the bounties of the 
Ancient Beauty thou wilt gain a measure of peace 
and health.  
     I bring thee to mind both night and day.  Just 
recently I had hoped to come to Haifa to visit thee, 
but various problems and the pressure of work have 
left me no time; for I want to see the travellers off, 
and every one of them presented a long list of names.  
God be thanked, I have written to them all.  
     Kiss the fresh flower of the garden of sweetness, 
Shoghi Effendi.  
 
     20.  O thou Greatest and Most Merciful Holy 
Leaf!  
     I arrived in New York in the best of health, and I 
 
+P18 
have been at all times thinking of thee, and supplicating 
fervently at the threshold of the Blessed 
Beauty that He may guard thee in the stronghold of 
His protection.  We are in the utmost fellowship and 
joy.  I hope that thou wilt be sheltered under His 
bountiful care.  
     Write to me at once about &Ruha &Khanum's and 
Shoghi Effendi's condition, informing me fully and 
hiding nothing; this is the best way.  
     Convey my utmost longing to all.  
 
     21.  I do not know in what words I could 
describe my longing for my honoured sister.  Whatever 
it may write, my pen falls short.  
 
+P19 
                        III 
                From the Writings of 
                   SHOGHI EFFENDI 
 
+P20 
 
+P21 
                        III 
                From the Writings of 
                   SHOGHI EFFENDI 
 
     1.  This servant, after that grievous event and 
great calamity, the ascension of His Holiness 
&Abdu'l-Baha to the &Abha Kingdom, has been so 
stricken with grief and pain and so entangled in the 
troubles created by the enemies of the Cause of God, 
that I consider that my presence here, at such a time 
and in such an atmosphere, is not in accordance with 
the fulfilment of my important and sacred duties.  
     For this reason, unable to do otherwise, I have left 
for a time the affairs of the Cause both at home and 
abroad, under the supervision of the Holy Family 
and the headship of the Greatest Holy Leaf until, by 
the Grace of God, having gained health, strength, 
self-confidence and spiritual energy, and having 
taken into my hands, in accordance with my aim and 
desire, entirely and regularly the work of service I 
shall attain to my utmost spiritual hope and aspiration.  
 
     2.  And in this fervent plea, my voice is once 
more reinforced by the passionate, and perhaps, the 
 
+P22 
last, entreaty, of the Greatest Holy Leaf, whose 
spirit, now hovering on the edge of the Great 
Beyond, longs to carry on its flight to the &Abha 
Kingdom, and into the presence of a Divine, an 
almighty Father, an assurance of the joyous consummation 
of an enterprise,+F1 the progress of which 
has so greatly brightened the closing days of her 
earthly life.  
 
     3.  GREATEST HOLY LEAF'S IMMORTAL SPIRIT 
WINGED ITS FLIGHT GREAT BEYOND.  COUNTLESS LOVERS 
HER SAINTLY LIFE IN EAST AND WEST SEIZED WITH 
PANGS OF ANGUISH, PLUNGED IN UNUTTERABLE 
SORROW.  HUMANITY SHALL ERELONG RECOGNIZE ITS 
IRREPARABLE LOSS.  OUR BELOVED FAITH, WELL-NIGH 
CRUSHED BY DEVASTATING BLOW OF &ABDU'L-BAHA'S 
UNEXPECTED ASCENSION, NOW LAMENTS PASSING LAST 
REMNANT OF &BAHA'U'LLAH, ITS MOST EXALTED 
MEMBER.  HOLY FAMILY CRUELLY DIVESTED ITS MOST 
PRECIOUS, MOST GREAT ADORNING.  I, FOR MY PART, 
BEWAIL SUDDEN REMOVAL MY SOLE EARTHLY SUSTAINER, 
THE JOY AND SOLACE OF MY LIFE.  HER SACRED 
REMAINS WILL REPOSE VICINITY HOLY SHRINES.  SO 
GRIEVOUS A BEREAVEMENT NECESSITATES SUSPENSION 
FOR NINE MONTHS THROUGHOUT &BAHA'I WORLD EVERY 
MANNER RELIGIOUS FESTIVITY.  INFORM LOCAL ASSEMBLIES 
AND GROUPS HOLD BEFITTING MANNER MEMORIAL 
GATHERINGS, EXTOL A LIFE SO LADEN SACRED EXPERIENCES, 
SO RICH IMPERISHABLE MEMORIES...  ADVISE 
 
+F1 Construction of the House of Worship in Wilmette, Illinois.  
 
+P23 
HOLDING ADDITIONAL COMMEMORATION SERVICE OF 
STRICTLY DEVOTIONAL CHARACTER AUDITORIUM 
&MASHRIQU'L-ADHKAR.  
 
     4.  GREATEST HOLY LEAF ASCENDED &ABHA KINGDOM.  
OUR GRIEF IMMENSE, OUR LOSS IRREPARABLE.  
INFORM LOCAL ASSEMBLIES COMMEMORATE BEFITTINGLY 
SACRED EXPERIENCES SO RICH, SO SUBLIME, SO 
EVENTFUL A LIFE.  MAGNITUDE OF OUR SORROW 
DEMANDS COMPLETE SUSPENSION FOR NINE MONTHS 
THROUGHOUT &BAHA'I WORLD EVERY FORM RELIGIOUS 
FESTIVITY.  HER MORTAL REMAINS LAID VICINITY HOLY 
SHRINE.  
 
     5.  O ye who burn in the flames of bereavement!  
By the Day-star of the World, my bereaved and 
longing heart is afire with a grief that is beyond my 
description.  The sudden, the grievous and calamitous 
news that the Most Exalted, the pure, the holy, 
the immaculate, the brightly shining Leaf, the 
Remnant of &Baha, and His trust, the eternal fruit 
and the one last remembrance of the Holy Tree
--may my life be offered for the wrongs she 
suffered--has ascended, reached me like live coals 
cast into a frail and afflicted heart.  The foundations 
of my serenity were shattered, and tears of desolation 
came like a flood that carries all away.  
     Alas, that I was prevented from being with her at 
the close of her earthly days, at that moment when 
 
+P24 
she ascended to her Lord, her Master, and when her 
delicate body was placed in the tomb.  Not mine that 
honour, that high privilege, for I was far away, 
deprived, bereft, excluded.  
     O brothers and sisters in the spirit!  In this solemn 
hour, from one direction we can hear the sounds of 
loud weeping, and cries of mourning and woe, 
rising out of the throats of the people of &Baha 
throughout this nether world, because of their 
separation from that rich mine of faithfulness, that 
Orb of the heaven of eternal glory--because of her 
setting below the horizon of this holy Spot.  But 
from another direction can be heard the songs of 
praise and holy exultation from the Company on 
High and the undying dwellers in Paradise, and 
from beyond them all God's Prophets, coming forth 
to welcome that fair being, and to place her in the 
retreats of glory, and to seat her at the right hand of 
Him Who is the Centre of God's Mighty Covenant.  
     The community of &Baha, whether in the East of 
the world or the West, are lamenting like orphans 
left destitute; fevered, tormented, unquiet, they are 
voicing their grief.  Out of the depths of their 
sorrowing hearts, there rises to the &Abha Horizon 
this continual piercing cry:  `Where art thou gone, 
O torch of tender love?  Where art thou gone, O 
source of grace and mercy?  Where art thou gone, O 
symbol of bounty and generosity?  Where art thou 
gone, O day-spring of detachment in this world of 
being?  Where art thou gone, O trust left by &Baha 
among His people, O remnant left by Him among 
 
+P25 
His servants, O sweet scent of His garment, shed 
across all created things!'  
     O ye who loved that luminous face!  The oil 
within that shining lamp was used up in this world 
and its light was extinguished; and yet, in the 
lamp-niche of the Kingdom, the fingers of the Lord 
of the heavenly throne have kindled it so bright, and 
it has cast such a splendour on the maids of 
Heaven--dwelling in chambers of red rubies and 
circling about her--that they all called from out their  
souls and hearts, `O joy upon joy!' and with shouts 
of, `Well done!  Well done!  Upon thee be God's 
blessings, O Most Exalted Leaf!' did they welcome 
that quintessence of love and purity within the 
towering pavilions of eternity.  
     At that time, as bidden by the Lord, the Protector, 
the Self-Subsisting, did the heavenly Crier raise up 
his voice and cry out:  `O Most Exalted Leaf!  Thou 
art she who did endure with patience in God's way 
from thine earliest childhood and throughout all thy 
life, and did bear in His pathway what none other 
hath borne, save only God in His own Self, the 
Supreme Ruler over all created things, and before 
Him, His noble Herald, and after Him, His holy 
Branch, the One, the Inaccessible, the Most High.  
The people of the Concourse on High seek the 
fragrance of thy presence, and the dwellers in the 
retreats of eternity circle about thee.  To this bear 
witness the souls of the cherubim within the 
tabernacles of majesty and might, and beyond them 
the tongue of God the One True Lord, the Pure, the 
 
+P26 
Most Wondrous.  Blessedness be thine and a goodly 
abode; glad tidings to thee and a happy ending!'  
     To one who was reared by the hands of her loving 
kindness, the burden of this direst of calamities is 
well nigh unbearable; and yet praised be the God of 
glory that her fragile frame has escaped from the 
prison of continual ordeals and afflictions which, 
with an astonishing forbearance, and for more than 
eighty years, she accepted and endured.  Now is she 
free; delivered from her chains of care and sorrow; 
safe from all the suffering and pain, released from 
the ills of this nether world.  She rolled up and 
packed away the years of longing for her mighty 
Father, and for Him, her loving and well-favoured 
Brother, and departed to her abode in the midmost 
heart of the Heavens.  
     This heavenly being, during all the turmoil of her 
days, did not rest for a moment, nor ever did she 
seek quiet and peace.  From the beginning of her life, 
from her very childhood, she tasted sorrow's cup; 
she drank down the afflictions and calamities of the 
earliest years of the great Cause of God.  In the 
tumult of the Year of &Hin,+F1 as a result of the sacking 
and plundering of her glorious Father's wealth and 
holdings, she learned the bitterness of destitution 
and want.  Then she shared the imprisonment, the 
grief, the banishment of the &Abha Beauty, and in  
the storm which broke out in &Iraq--because of the 
plotting and the treachery of the prime mover of 
 
+F1 The numerical value of the letters composing `&Hin' indicates 
+F1 1268 A.H. or 1851-52 A.D.  
 
+P27 
mischief, the focal centre of hate--she bore, with 
complete resignation and acquiescence, uncounted 
ordeals.  She forgot herself, did without her kin, 
turned aside from possessions, struck off at one 
blow the bonds of every worldly concern; and 
then, like a lovelorn moth, she circled day and 
night about the flame of the matchless Beauty of 
her Lord.  
     In the heaven of severance, she shone like the 
Morning Star, fair and bright, and through her 
character and all her ways, she shed upon kin and 
stranger, upon the learned, and the lowly, the 
radiance of &Baha'u'llah's surpassing perfection.  
Because of the intense and deep-seated sorrows and 
the manifold oppressive trials that assailed her
--never failing spring of grace that she was, essence 
of loving-kindness--in the Land of Mystery+F1 her 
lovely form was worn away to a breath, to a 
shadow; and during the Most Great Convulsion, 
which in the years of `Stress' made every heart to 
quake, she stood as a soaring pillar, immovable and 
fixed; and from the blasts of desolation that rose 
and blew, that Leaf of the eternal Lote-Tree did not 
wither.  
     Rather did she redouble her efforts, urging 
herself on the more, to servitude and sacrifice.  In 
captivating hearts and winning over souls, in 
destroying doubts and misgivings, she led the field.  
With the waters of her countless mercies, she 
brought thorny hearts to a blossoming of love from 
 
+F1 Adrianople.  
 
+P28 
the All-Glorious, and with the influence of her pure 
loving-kindness, transformed the implacable, the 
unyielding, into impassioned lovers of the celestial 
Beauty's peerless Cause.  
     Yet another wound was inflicted on her injured 
heart by the aggressions and violations of the 
evil-doers within the prison-fortress,+F1 yet another 
blow was struck at her afflicted being.  And then her 
anguish was increased by the passing of the &Abha 
Beauty, and the cruelty of the disloyal added more 
fuel to the fires of her mourning.  In the midst of that 
storm of violation, the countenance of that rare 
treasure of the Lord shone all the brighter, and 
throughout the &Baha'i community, her value and 
high rank became clearly perceived.  By the vehement 
onslaught of the chief of violators against the 
sacred beliefs of the followers of the Faith, she was 
neither frightened nor in despair.  
     In the days of the Commission of Investigation, 
she was a staunch and trusted supporter of the 
peerless Branch of &Baha'u'llah, and a companion 
to Him beyond compare.  At the time of His absence 
in the western world, she was His competent 
deputy, His representative and vicegerent, with 
none to equal her.  In a Tablet from the pen of the 
Centre of the Covenant, addressed to His consort, 
are these words referring to His brilliant sister:  `To 
my honoured and distinguished sister do thou 
convey the expression of my heartfelt, my intense 
longing.  Day and night she liveth in my remembrance.  
 
+F1 &Akka.  
 
+P29 
I dare make no mention of the feelings 
which separation from her has aroused in my heart, 
for whatever I should attempt to express in writing 
will assuredly be effaced by the tears which such 
sentiments must bring to my eyes.'  
     After the ascension of &Abdu'l-Baha to the realm 
of the All-Glorious, that Light of the Concourse on 
High enfolded me, helpless as I was, in the embrace 
of her love, and with incomparable pity and tenderness, 
persuaded, guided, and urged me on to the 
requirements of servitude.  The very elements of this 
frail being were leavened with her love, refreshed by 
her companionship, sustained by her eternal spirit.  
Never for a moment will her kindnesses, her 
favours, pass from my memory, and as the months 
and the years go by, the effects of them on this 
mourning heart will never be diminished.  
 
     O Liege Lady of the people of &Baha!  
     Broken is our circle by thy going--
     Broken our circle, broken too, our hearts.  
 
     That my tongue, my pen could thank thee were a 
hopeless task, nor can any praise of mine befit thine 
excellence.  Not even a droplet of all thine endless 
love can I aspire to fathom, nor can I adequately 
praise and tell of even the most trifling out of all the 
events of thy precious life.  In the courts of the 
Almighty, for this frail being thy sacred spirit 
intercedeth, and in this darksome world, the sweet 
memory of thee is the succourer and friend of this 
lowly one.  Thy comely face is etched for ever on the 
 
+P30 
tablet of my grieving soul, those smiles that 
refreshed my life are forever and safely imprinted in 
the innermost recesses of my stricken heart.  Let me 
not be forgotten by thee in the glorious precincts on 
high; leave me not despairing, nor excluded from 
the never-ceasing reinforcements that come from 
the living Lord; and in this world and the Kingdom, 
help me to reach what thou knowest to be my 
dearest hope.  
     O faithful friends!  It is right and fitting that out of 
honour to her most high station, in the gatherings of 
the followers of &Baha'u'llah, whether of the East 
or the West, all &Baha'i festivals and celebrations  
should be completely suspended for a period of nine 
months, and that in every city and village, memorial 
meetings should be held, with all solemnity, spirituality, 
lowliness and consecration--where, in the 
choicest of language, may be described at length the 
shining attributes of that most resplendent Leaf, that 
archetype of the people of &Baha.  If it be possible for 
the individual believers to postpone their personal 
celebrations for a period of one year, let them 
unhesitatingly do so thus to express their sorrow at 
this agonizing misfortune.  Let them read this letter, 
this supplication, in their memorial gatherings, that 
perchance the Almighty will lighten my burden, 
and dispel the clouds of my bereavement; that He 
will answer my prayers, and fulfil my hopes, out of 
His bounty, His power, His grace.  
 
+P31 
     6.  Brethern and fellow-mourners in the Faith 
of &Baha'u'llah!  
     A sorrow, reminiscent in its poignancy, of the 
devastating grief caused by &Abdu'l-Baha's sudden 
removal from our midst, has stirred the &Baha'i 
world to its foundations.  The Greatest Holy Leaf, 
the well-beloved and treasured Remnant of  
&Baha'u'llah entrusted to our frail and unworthy 
hands by our departed Master, has passed to the 
Great Beyond, leaving a legacy that time can never 
dim.  
     The Community of the Most Great Name, in its 
entirety and to its very core, feels the sting of this 
cruel loss.  Inevitable though this calamitous event 
appeared to us all, however acute our apprehensions 
of its steady approach, the consciousness of its final 
consummation at this terrible hour leaves us, we 
whose souls have been impregnated by the energizing 
influence of her love, prostrated and disconsolate.  
     How can my lonely pen, so utterly inadequate to 
glorify so exalted a station, so impotent to portray 
the experiences of so sublime a life, so disqualified to 
recount the blessings she showered upon me since 
my earliest childhood--how can such a pen repay 
the great debt of gratitude and love that I owe her 
whom I regarded as my chief sustainer, my most 
affectionate comforter, the joy and inspiration of my 
life?  My grief is too immense, my remorse too 
profound, to be able to give full vent at this moment 
to the feelings that surge within me.  
 
+P32 
     Only future generations and pens abler than mine 
can, and will, pay a worthy tribute to the towering 
grandeur of her spiritual life, to the unique part she 
played throughout the tumultuous stages of 
&Baha'i history, to the expressions of unqualified 
praise that have streamed from the pen of both 
&Baha'u'llah and &Abdu'l-Baha, the Centre of His 
Covenant, though unrecorded, and in the main 
unsuspected by the mass of her passionate admirers 
in East and West, the share she has had in influencing 
the course of some of the chief events in the annals of 
the Faith, the sufferings she bore, the sacrifices she 
made, the rare gifts of unfailing sympathy she so 
strikingly displayed--these, and many others stand 
so inextricably interwoven with the fabric of the 
Cause itself that no future historian of the Faith of 
&Baha'u'llah can afford to ignore or minimize.  
     As far back as the concluding stages of the heroic 
age of the Cause, which witnessed the imprisonment 
of &Baha'u'llah in the &Siyah-Chal of 
&Tihran, the Greatest Holy Leaf, then still in her 
infancy, was privileged to taste of the cup of woe 
which the first believers of that Apostolic Age had 
quaffed.  
     How well I remember her recall, at a time when 
her faculties were still unimpaired, the gnawing 
suspense that ate into the hearts of those who 
watched by her side, at the threshold of her pillaged 
house, expectant to hear at any moment the news of 
&Baha'u'llah's imminent execution!  In those sinister 
hours, she often recounted, her parents had so 
 
+P33 
suddenly lost their earthly possessions that within 
the space of a single day from being the privileged 
member of one of the wealthiest families of &Tihran 
she had sunk to the state of a sufferer from unconcealed 
poverty.  Deprived of the means of subsistence 
her illustrious mother, the famed &Navvab, 
was constrained to place in the palm of her daughter's 
hand a handful of flour and to induce her to 
accept it as a substitute for her daily bread.  
     And when at a later time this revered and precious 
member of the Holy Family, then in her teens, came 
to be entrusted by the guiding hand of her Father 
with missions that no girl of her age could, or would 
be willing to, perform, with what spontaneous joy 
she seized her opportunity and acquitted herself of 
the task with which she had been entrusted!  The 
delicacy and extreme gravity of such functions as 
she, from time to time, was called upon to fulfil, 
when the city of &Baghdad was swept by the 
hurricane which the heedlessness and perversity of 
&Mirza &Yahya had unchained, as well as the tender 
solicitude which, at so early an age, she evinced 
during the period of &Baha'u'llah's enforced retirement 
to the mountains of &Sulaymaniyyih, marked  
her as one who was both capable of sharing the 
burden, and willing to make the sacrifice, which her 
high birth demanded.  
     How staunch was her faith, how calm her 
demeanour, how forgiving her attitude, how severe 
her trials, at a time when the forces of schism had 
rent asunder the ties that united the little band of 
 
+P34 
exiles which had settled in Adrianople and whose 
fortunes seemed then to have sunk to their lowest 
ebb!  It was in this period of extreme anxiety, when 
the rigours of a winter of exceptional severity, 
coupled with the privations entailed by unhealthy 
housing accommodation and dire financial distress, 
undermined once for all her health and sapped the 
vitality which she had hitherto so thoroughly 
enjoyed.  The stress and storm of that period made 
an abiding impression upon her mind, and she 
retained till the time of her death on her beauteous 
and angelic face evidences of its intense hardships.  
     Not until, however, she had been confined in the 
company of &Baha'u'llah within the walls of the 
prison-city of &Akka did she display, in the plentitude 
of her power and in the full abundance of her 
love for Him, those gifts that single her out, next to 
&Abdu'l-Baha, among the members of the Holy 
Family, as the brightest embodiment of that love 
which is born of God and of that human sympathy 
which few mortals are capable of evincing.  
     Banishing from her mind and heart every earthly 
attachment, renouncing the very idea of matrimony, 
she, standing resolutely by the side of a 
Brother whom she was to aid and serve so well, 
arose to dedicate her life to the service of her Father's 
glorious Cause.  Whether in the management of the 
affairs of His Household in which she excelled, or in 
the social relationships which she so assiduously 
cultivated in order to shield both &Baha'u'llah and 
&Abdu'l-Baha, whether in the unfailing attention 
 
+P35 
she paid to the everyday needs of her Father, or in 
the traits of generosity, of affability and kindness, 
which she manifested, the Greatest Holy Leaf had by 
that time abundantly demonstrated her worthiness 
to rank as one of the noblest figures intimately 
associated with the life-long work of &Baha'u'llah.  
     How grievous was the ingratitude, how blind the 
fanaticism, how persistent the malignity of the 
officials, their wives, and their subordinates, in 
return for the manifold bounties which she, in close 
association with her Brother, so profusely conferred 
upon them!  Her patience, her magnanimity, her 
undiscriminating benevolence, far from disarming 
the hostility of that perverse generation, served only 
to inflame their rancour, to excite their jealousy, to 
intensify their fears.  The gloom that had settled 
upon that little band of imprisoned believers, who 
languished in the Fortress of &Akka contrasted with 
the spirit of confident hope, of deep-rooted optimism 
that beamed upon her serene countenance.  No 
calamity, however intense, could obscure the 
brightness of her saintly face, and no agitation, no 
matter how severe, could disturb the composure of 
her gracious and dignified behaviour.  
     That her sensitive heart instantaneously reacted to 
the slightest injury that befell the least significant of 
creatures, whether friend or foe, no one who knew 
her well could doubt.  And yet such was the restraining 
power of her will--a will which her spirit of 
self-renunciation so often prompted her to suppress
--that a superficial observer might well be led 
 
+P36 
to question the intensity of her emotions or to 
belittle the range of her sympathies.  In the school of 
adversity she, already endowed by Providence with 
the virtues of meekness and fortitude, learned 
through the example and exhortations of the Great 
Sufferer, Who was her Father, the lesson she was 
destined to teach the great mass of His followers for 
so long after Him.  
     Armed with the powers with which an intimate 
and long-standing companionship with 
&Baha'u'llah had already equipped her, and benefiting 
by the magnificent example which the 
steadily widening range of &Abdu'l-Baha's activities 
afforded her, she was prepared to face the storm 
which the treacherous conduct of the Covenant-breakers 
had aroused and to withstand its most 
damaging onslaughts.  
     Great as had been her sufferings ever since her 
infancy, the anguish of mind and heart which the 
ascension of &Baha'u'llah occasioned nerved her, as 
never before, to a resolve which no upheaval could 
bend and which her frail constitution belied.  Amidst 
the dust and heat of the commotion which that 
faithless and rebellious company engendered she 
found herself constrained to dissolve ties of family 
relationship, to sever long-standing and intimate 
friendships, to discard lesser loyalties for the sake of 
her supreme allegiance to a Cause she had loved so 
dearly and had served so well.  
     The disruption that ensued found her ranged by 
the side of Him Whom her departed Father had 
 
+P37 
appointed as the Centre of His Covenant and the 
authorized Expounder of His Word.  Her venerated 
mother, as well as her distinguished paternal uncle, 
&Aqay-i-Kalim--the twin pillars who, all throughout 
the various stages of &Baha'u'llah's exile from 
the Land of His Birth to the final place of His 
confinement, had demonstrated, unlike most of the 
members of His Family, the tenacity of their loyalty
--had already passed behind the Veil.  Death, in the 
most tragic circumstances, had also robbed her 
of the Purest Branch, her only brother besides 
&Abdu'l-Baha, while still in the prime of youth.  She 
alone of the family of &Baha'u'llah remained to 
cheer the heart and reinforce the efforts of the Most 
Great Branch, against Whom were solidly arrayed 
the almost entire company of His faithless relatives.  
In her arduous task she was seconded by the diligent 
efforts of &Munirih &Khanum, the Holy Mother, and 
those of her daughters whose age allowed them to 
assist in the accomplishment of that stupendous 
achievement with which the name of &Abdu'l-Baha 
will for ever remain associated.  
     With the passing of &Baha'u'llah and the fierce 
onslaught of the forces of disruption that followed in 
its wake, the Greatest Holy Leaf, now in the hey-day 
of her life, rose to the height of her great opportunity 
and acquitted herself worthily of her task.  It would 
take me beyond the compass of the tribute I am 
moved to pay to her memory were I to dwell upon the 
incessant machinations to which &Muhammad-Ali, 
the arch-breaker of the Covenant of &Baha'u'llah, 
 
+P38 
and his despicable supporters basely resorted, 
upon the agitation which their cleverly-directed 
campaign of misrepresentation and calumny produced 
in quarters directly connected with &Sultan 
&Abdu'l-Hamid and his advisers, upon the trials and 
investigations to which it gave rise, upon the 
rigidity of the incarceration it reimposed, and upon 
the perils it revived.  Suffice it to say that but for her 
sleepless vigilance, her tact, her courtesy, her 
extreme patience and heroic fortitude, grave complications 
might have ensued and the load of 
&Abdu'l-Baha's anxious care would have been considerably 
increased.  
     And when the storm-cloud that had darkened the 
horizon of the Holy Land had been finally dissipated 
and the call raised by our beloved &Abdu'l-Baha had 
stirred to a new life certain cities of the American and 
European continents, the Most Exalted Leaf became 
the recipient of the unbounded affection and blessings 
of One Who could best estimate her virtues 
and appreciate her merits.  
     The decline of her precious life had by that time 
set in, and the burden of advancing age was beginning 
to becloud the radiance of her countenance.  
Forgetful of her own self, disdaining rest and 
comfort, and undeterred by the obstacles that still 
stood in her path, she, acting as the honoured 
hostess to a steadily increasing number of pilgrims 
who thronged &Abdu'l-Baha's residence from both 
the East and the West, continued to display those 
same attributes that had won her, in the preceding 
 
+P39 
phases of her career, so great a measure of admiration 
and love.  
     And when, in pursuance of God's inscrutable 
Wisdom, the ban on &Abdu'l-Baha's confinement 
was lifted and the Plan which He, in the darkest 
hours of His confinement, had conceived materialized, 
He with unhesitating confidence, invested His 
trusted and honoured sister with the responsibility 
of attending to the multitudinous details arising out 
of His protracted absence from the Holy Land.  
     No sooner had &Abdu'l-Baha stepped upon the 
shores of the European and American continents 
than our beloved &Khanum found herself well-nigh 
overwhelmed with thrilling messages, each 
betokening the irresistible advance of the Cause in a 
manner which, notwithstanding the vast range of 
her experience, seemed to her almost incredible.  
The years in which she basked in the sunshine of 
&Abdu'l-Baha's spiritual victories were, perhaps, 
among the brightest and happiest of her life.  Little 
did she dream when, as a little girl, she was running 
about, in the courtyard of her Father's house in 
&Tihran, in the company of Him Whose destiny was 
to be one day the chosen Centre of God's indestructible 
Covenant, that such a Brother would be 
capable of achieving, in realms so distant, and 
among races so utterly remote, so great and memorable 
a victory.  
     The enthusiasm and joy which swelled in her 
breast as she greeted &Abdu'l-Baha on His triumphant 
return from the West, I will not venture to 
 
+P40 
describe.  She was astounded at the vitality of which 
He had, despite His unimaginable sufferings, 
proved Himself capable.  She was lost in admiration 
at the magnitude of the forces which His utterances 
had released.  She was filled with thankfulness to 
&Baha'u'llah for having enabled her to witness the 
evidences of such brilliant victory for His Cause no 
less than for His Son.                      
     The outbreak of the Great War gave her yet 
another opportunity to reveal the true worth of her 
character and to release the latent energies of her 
heart.  The residence of &Abdu'l-Baha in Haifa was 
besieged, all throughout that dreary conflict, by a 
concourse of famished men, women and children 
whom the maladministration, the cruelty and neglect 
of the officials of the Ottoman Government had 
driven to seek an alleviation to their woes.  From the 
hand of the Greatest Holy Leaf, and out of the 
abundance of her heart, these hapless victims of a 
contemptible tyranny, received day after day 
unforgettable evidences of a love they had learned to 
envy and admire.  Her words of cheer and comfort, 
the food, the money, the clothing she freely dispensed, 
the remedies which, by a process of her 
own, she herself prepared and diligently applied
--all these had their share in comforting the disconsolate, 
in restoring sight to the blind, in sheltering 
the orphan, in healing the sick, and in succouring the 
homeless and the wanderer.  
     She had reached, amidst the darkness of the war 
 
+P41 
days the high water-mark of her spiritual attainments.  
Few, if any, among the unnumbered 
benefactors of society whose privilege has been to 
allay, in various measures, the hardships and sufferings 
entailed by that Fierce Conflict, gave as freely 
and as disinterestedly as she did; few exercised that 
undefinable influence upon the beneficiaries of their 
gifts.  
     Age seemed to have accentuated the tenderness of 
her loving heart, and to have widened still further 
the range of her sympathies.  The sight of appalling 
suffering around her steeled her energies and 
revealed such potentialities that her most intimate 
associates had failed to suspect.  
     The ascension of &Abdu'l-Baha, so tragic in its 
suddenness, was to her a terrible blow from the 
effects of which she never completely recovered.  To 
her He, Whom she called `&Aqa', had been a refuge 
in times of adversity.  On Him she had been led to 
place her sole reliance.  In Him she had found ample 
compensation for the bereavements she had suffered, 
the desertions she had witnessed, the ingratitude 
she had been shown by friends and kindred.  No 
one could ever dream that a woman of her age, so 
frail in body, so sensitive of heart, so loaded with the 
cares of almost eighty years of incessant tribulation, 
could so long survive so shattering a blow.  And yet, 
history, no less than the annals of our immortal 
Faith, shall record for her a share in the advancement 
and consolidation of the world-wide Community 
 
+P42 
which the hand of &Abdu'l-Baha had helped to 
fashion, which no one among the remnants of His 
Family can rival.  
     Which of the blessings am I to recount, which in 
her unfailing solicitude she showered upon me, in 
the most critical and agitated hours of my life?  To 
me, standing in so dire a need of the vitalizing grace 
of God, she was the living symbol of many an 
attribute I had learned to admire in &Abdu'l-Baha.  
She was to me a continual reminder of His inspiring 
personality, of His calm resignation, of His munificence 
and magnanimity.  To me she was an incarnation 
of His winsome graciousness, of His all-encompassing 
tenderness and love.  
     It would take me too long to make even a brief 
allusion to those incidents of her life, each of which 
eloquently proclaims her as a daughter, worthy to 
inherit that priceless heritage bequeathed to her by 
&Baha'u'llah.  A purity of life that reflected itself in 
even the minutest details of her daily occupations 
and activities; a tenderness of heart that obliterated 
every distinction of creed, class and colour; a 
resignation and serenity that evoked to the mind the 
calm and heroic fortitude of the &Bab; a natural    
fondness of flowers and children that was so characteristic 
of &Baha'u'llah; an unaffected simplicity of 
manners; an extreme sociability which made her 
accessible to all; a generosity, a love, at once 
disinterested and undiscriminating, that reflected so 
clearly the attributes of &Abdu'l-Baha's character; a 
sweetness of temper; a cheerfulness that no amount 
 
+P43 
of sorrow could becloud; a quiet and unassuming 
disposition that served to enhance a thousandfold 
the prestige of her exalted rank; a forgiving nature 
that instantly disarmed the most unyielding enemy
--these rank among the outstanding attributes of a 
saintly life which history will acknowledge as 
having been endowed with a celestial potency that 
few of the heroes of the past possessed.  
     No wonder that in Tablets, which stand as eternal 
testimonies to the beauty of her character, 
&Baha'u'llah and &Abdu'l-Baha have paid touching 
tributes to those things that testify to her 
exalted position among the members of their 
Family, that proclaim her as an example to their 
followers, and as an object worthy of the admiration 
of all mankind.  
     I need only, at this juncture, quote the following 
passage from a Tablet addressed by &Abdu'l-Baha 
to the Holy Mother, the tone of which reveals 
unmistakably the character of those ties that bound 
Him to so precious, so devoted a sister:  
     `To my honoured and distinguished sister do thou 
convey the expression of my heartfelt, my intense longing.  
Day and night she liveth in my remembrance.  I dare make 
no mention of the feelings which separation from her has 
aroused in my heart, for whatever I should attempt to 
express in writing will assuredly be effaced by the tears 
which such sentiments must bring to my eyes.'  
     Dearly-beloved Greatest Holy Leaf!  Through the 
mist of tears that fill my eyes I can clearly see, as I pen 
these lines, thy noble figure before me, and can 
 
+P44 
recognize the serenity of thy kindly face.  I can still 
gaze, though the shadows of the grave separate us, 
into thy blue, love-deep eyes, and can feel in its calm 
intensity, the immense love thou didst bear for the 
Cause of thine Almighty Father, the attachment that 
bound thee to the most lowly and insignificant 
among its followers, the warm affection thou didst 
cherish for me in thine heart.  The memory of the 
ineffable beauty of thy smile shall ever continue to 
cheer and hearten me in the thorny path I am 
destined to pursue.  The remembrance of the touch 
of thine hand shall spur me on to follow steadfastly 
in thy way.  The sweet magic of thy voice shall 
remind me, when the hour of adversity is at its 
darkest, to hold fast to the rope thou didst seize so 
firmly all the days of thy life.  
     Bear thou this my message to &Abdu'l-Baha, 
thine exalted and divinely-appointed Brother:  If the 
Cause for which &Baha'u'llah toiled and laboured, 
for which Thou didst suffer years of agonizing 
sorrow, for the sake of which streams of sacred 
blood have flowed, should, in the days to come, 
encounter storms more severe than those it has 
already weathered, do Thou continue to overshadow, 
with Thine all-encompassing care and 
wisdom, Thy frail, Thy unworthy appointed child.  
     Intercede, O noble and well-favoured scion of a 
heavenly Father, for me no less than for the toiling 
masses of thy ardent lovers, who have sworn 
undying allegiance to thy memory, whose souls 
have been nourished by the energies of thy love, 
 
+P45 
whose conduct has been moulded by the inspiring 
example of thy life, and whose imaginations are 
fired by the imperishable evidences of thy lively 
faith, thy unshakable constancy, thy invincible 
heroism, thy great renunciation.  
     Whatever betide us, however distressing the 
vicissitudes which the nascent Faith of God may 
yet experience, we pledge ourselves, before the 
mercy-seat of thy glorious Father, to hand on, 
unimpaired and undivided, to generations yet 
unborn, the glory of that tradition of which thou 
hast been its most brilliant exemplar.  
     In the innermost recesses of our hearts, O thou 
exalted Leaf of the &Abha Paradise, we have reared 
for thee a shining mansion that the hand of time can 
never undermine, a shrine which shall frame eternally 
the matchless beauty of thy countenance, an 
altar whereon the fire of thy consuming love shall 
burn for ever.  
 
     7.  ENTREAT SORROW STRICKEN AMERICAN BELIEVERS 
NEVER ALLOW CONSCIOUSNESS THEIR AGONIZING 
LOSS PARALYZE DETERMINATION PROSECUTE AN ENTERPRISE 
ON WHICH ADORED OBJECT OUR MOURNING 
CENTRED HER BRIGHTEST HOPES.  
 
     8.  YOUR MESSAGE ALLEVIATED LOAD MY AGONIZING 
SORROW.  NOTHING LESS INFLEXIBLE RESOLVE 
CARRY OUT HER DEAREST PARTING WISH HOLD FAST 
CAUSE HER ALMIGHTY FATHER CAN LIFT ITS CRUSHING 
BURDEN.  
 
+P46 
     9.  PRAY ASSURE AMERICAN BELIEVERS BEHALF HOLY 
FAMILY MYSELF ABIDING APPRECIATION NUMEROUS 
EVIDENCES THEIR VALUED SYMPATHY.  OUR SORROW-LADEN 
HEARTS MUCH RELIEVED FILLED WITH GRATITUDE.  
OUT OF PANGS OF ANGUISH WHICH BEREAVED 
AMERICA EXPERIENCED IN HER SUDDEN SEPARATION 
FROM &ABDU'L-BAHA ADMINISTRATION GOD'S MIGHTY 
FAITH WAS BORN.  MIGHT NOT HER PRESENT GRIEF AT 
LOSS &BAHA'U'LLAH'S PRECIOUS DAUGHTER RELEASE 
SUCH FORCES AS WILL ENSURE SPEEDY COMPLETION 
&MASHRIQU'L-ADHKAR THE ADMINISTRATION'S MIGHTY 
BULWARK, SYMBOL OF ITS STRENGTH AND HARBINGER 
ITS PROMISED GLORY.  
  
     10.  Your valued message brought strength and 
solace to my aching heart.  I deeply appreciate the 
sentiments of my invaluable fellow-workers, who 
have by their eminent, their unforgettable and 
unique services, contributed so powerfully in 
brightening the closing days of her precious life.  The 
services each of you has rendered to our beloved 
Cause brought much joy and hope to her in the 
evening of her life, and are, therefore, highly 
meritorious in the sight of the Almighty.  May He 
bless abundantly your work in the Divine Vineyard, 
and enable you to render still greater services in the 
days to come.  
 
     11.  I deeply appreciate your sympathy.  My loss 
is tremendous and my sorrow so profound.  I will 
 
+P47 
pray that you, who have felt the power of her spirit 
at so advanced an age may be enabled to mirror forth 
its splendour and reveal its beauty to the world.  I 
will continue to pray in your behalf.  You are often in 
my thoughts.  Rest assured and persevere in your 
devoted efforts.  
 
     12.  I greatly value your sympathy in my cruel, 
my irreparable loss.  My only comfort is the assurance 
of her devoted lovers to remain firm and 
steadfast in the Cause and to strive to follow in her 
footsteps.  The example of her life is our solace, our 
inspiration and strength.  May the Beloved aid you 
to follow in her way, and to perpetuate her glorious 
memory.  
 
     13.  Your sweet and touching message imparted 
strength and solace to my heart.  I value the sentiments 
you express and am deeply grateful.  My grief 
is profound and my only comfort is the thought that 
her many lovers, East and West, are straining every 
nerve to promote those very ideals for which she 
suffered and toiled all the days of her eventful and 
sacred life.  I will continue to pray for your welfare 
and success from the depths of my heart.  Rest 
assured.  
 
+P48 
     14.  My great love for the Greatest Holy Leaf and 
my attachment to each one of you prompt me to add 
these few words in person and to express to you my 
gratitude for the expression of your valued sympathy.  
I greatly value your message, and will pray 
that the Almighty may bless your efforts in the 
service of a Cause for the sake of which our loved 
&Khanum sacrificed her precious life.  
 
     15.  The many evidences of your increasing zeal 
and activities in the service of our beloved Cause, 
have to a great measure, relieved my sorrow-laden 
heart.  I will continue to pray for your unsparing 
efforts, and wish you to persevere, whatever the 
vicissitudes which this immortal Faith may encounter 
in future.  Rest assured, and never feel disconsolate...  
     The celebration of &Baha'i festive anniversaries, 
I feel, should also be suspended during a period of 
nine months.  
 
     16.  Your highly impressive and touching message 
brought much relief to my weary soul.  I thank 
you from the depths of my heart.  I greatly value the 
sentiments expressed on behalf of a local community, 
the members of which have, by their services, 
their devotion and loyalty, contributed, to so great 
an extent, to the joy and satisfaction of the hearts of 
both &Abdu'l-Baha and the Greatest Holy Leaf.  My 
 
+P49 
great attachment to each one of you, as well as my 
immense love for our departed and beloved 
&Khanum, have prompted me to add these few 
words in person.  I will continue to pray for the 
success of your efforts, as well as for your spiritual 
advancement.  
 
     17.  The passing of the Greatest Holy Leaf has 
filled my heart with unutterable sorrow.  My comfort 
is the thought that the measure of success 
achieved, under your wise and able leadership, by 
the collective efforts of the American believers has 
brightened considerably the last days of her precious 
life.  Would to God that the continued endeavours of 
this little band of her devoted lovers who have 
brought so great a joy to her blessed heart, may 
bring further satisfaction to her soul, and realize, at 
the appointed time, her dearest wish and fondest 
hopes for the Cause in your land.  To complete the 
Temple, to clothe its naked dome, and terminate its 
exterior elaborate ornamentation, is the best and 
most effective way in which the American believers, 
the recipients of her untold favours, can demonstrate 
their fidelity to her memory and their gratitude 
for the inestimable blessings she showered 
upon them.  
 
     18.  O well-loved friend, 
The emotions that have possessed my grieving 
 
+P50 
heart are such that they cannot be put into words, 
and tongue and pen are helpless to describe them.  
The one consolation of this servant is the steadfastness 
and the redoubled services of those dearly-loved 
ones in Iran, and the good news of energetic 
efforts being exerted by the friends in that land.  This 
is what dissipates the clouds of my grieving, and 
dispels the darkness of my anguish, and quiets the 
flames that consume my very being, and casts a ray 
of joy across the darkened sky of my agonized and 
stricken heart.  
 
     19.  I wish to add a few words in person as a 
token of my deepfelt appreciation of your loving 
message of sympathy in the great loss the family of 
&Abdu'l-Baha and myself have sustained.  My 
prayer for each one of you is that the Almighty may 
aid you to perpetuate her glorious memory, to walk 
in her footsteps and to transmit to future generations 
the tradition she has bequeathed to us all.  
 
     20.  I am moved to add a few words with my 
own pen, to what has been written on my behalf, 
renewing my plea to you and through you, to each 
member of your beloved community, to prosecute, 
with undiminished vigour the enterprise which you 
have so splendidly inaugurated.  The Greatest Holy 
Leaf, from her retreat of Glory, is watching over 
you, is interceding for every one of you, and is 
 
+P51 
expecting you to play your part in the great task, 
with which the prestige of her Father's glorious 
Cause is so closely associated.  You have, while she 
lived amongst us, contributed to a remarkable 
degree to the brightening of her earthly life.  By your 
persistent, your heroic endeavours you will, I am 
sure, bring added joy to her soul, and will vindicate 
afresh your undying loyalty to her memory.  
 
     21.  The passing of the beloved &Khanum has 
plunged me in unspeakable sorrow.  What a gap she 
has left behind her!  It is terrible to contemplate.  
Your message, which I greatly value, lessened 
considerably the burden of my grief as I am fully 
conscious of the extent to which you have, in so  
many different ways, contributed to her physical 
well-being, and to the joy and satisfaction of her 
soul.  We are all indebted to you for the many 
evidences of your loving and unfailing solicitude for 
her welfare, and we can only pray at her grave that 
her spirit may intercede for you before the throne of 
her glorious Father, and aid you to accomplish still 
greater things for a Cause, in the path of which she 
toiled and suffered all the days of her precious life.  
 
     22.  I greatly value the expression of your 
loving sympathy and am greatly relieved by the 
sentiments your message conveyed.  I will pray that 
you may be assisted, individually and collectively, 
to follow her inspiring example, to bring happiness 
 
+P52 
to her soul, and to proclaim far and wide the purity 
of her life, the immensity of her love, and the 
supreme nobility of her character.  
 
     23.  I wish to express to your distinguished 
assembly my gratitude for the action they have 
taken in reproducing in facsimile my humble tribute 
to the Greatest Holy Leaf.  The hundred copies you 
sent me have been received and are splendid reproductions 
of the original.  The finest and most enduring 
tribute which can be paid to her memory lies 
within the grasp, and constitutes the supreme 
opportunity, of the American believers.  Her earthly 
life, as it drew to a close, was much brightened by 
the brilliant accomplishments of her devoted lovers 
in the American continent.  May her pure angelic 
soul in the realms beyond derive added satisfaction 
from the uninterrupted progress and the eventual 
completion of an enterprise on which she had 
centered the one remaining joy of her life.  
 
     24.  O ye who share my anguish and are my 
comforters in my distress and bereavement!  In these 
past few months, from the day of the passing of that 
fairest fruit of the Undying Tree, of the setting of 
that wondrous Star in the heavens of endless glory, 
and of that bright Ray from the well spring of 
pre-existent light, [&Abdu'l-Baha], the Ancient 
Beauty, the Most Great Name--may the spirits of 
 
+P53 
the Concourse on High be sacrificed for Him--has 
witnessed what has come upon me, whom she had 
surrounded at all times with her loving-kindness, 
her unceasing favours, and what a wound this loss  
has inflicted on my suffering heart.  This parting 
from her has left my whole being in turmoil, 
burning with the fire of my love and longing for her.  
When, in the morning and the evening, I call her 
beloved face to mind, and let her smiles, that 
nourished the spirit, pass again before my eyes, and I 
think over all her bounty to me, all her unnumbered 
kindnesses, and remember that astonishing meekness 
she showed in her sufferings--then the flames 
of yearning love are kindled yet again, and sighs 
come out of my heart, and tears flow from my eyes, 
so that all control is lost and I sink into a sea of 
anguish without end.  
     Bearing witness to this, at this very moment, is 
her own pure and radiant soul, her bright and sacred 
spirit, that soars in the atmosphere of the invisible 
realm, and gazes, from beyond the throne of the 
Most High, upon me and upon those others on earth 
who are enamoured of her well-beloved name.  
     O thou Scion of &Baha!  I weep over thee in the 
night season, as do the bereaved; and at break of day 
I cry out unto thee with the tongue of my heart, my 
limbs and members, and again and again I repeat thy 
well-loved name, and I groan over the loss of thee, 
over thy meekness and ordeals, and how thou didst 
love me, over the sufferings thou didst bear, and the 
terrible calamities, and the wretchedness and the 
griefs, and the abasement, and the rejection--and all 
 
+P54 
this only and solely for the sake of thy Lord and 
because of thy burning love for those, out of all of 
creation, who shared in thine ardour.  
     Whensoever, in sleep, I call to mind and see thy 
smiling face, whensoever, by day or night, I circumambulate 
thine honoured tomb, then in the innermost 
depths of my being are rekindled the fires of 
yearning, and the cord of my patience is severed, 
and again the tears come and all the world grows 
dark before my eyes.  And whensoever I remember 
what blows were rained upon thee at the close of thy 
days, the discomforts, trials and illnesses--and I 
picture thy surroundings now, in the Sanctuary on 
High, in the midmost heart of Heaven, beside the 
pavilions of grandeur and might; and I behold thy 
present glory, thy deliverance, the delights, the 
bounties, the bestowals, the majesty and dominion 
and power, the joy, thine exultation, and thy 
triumph--then the burden of my grieving is lightened, 
the cloud of sorrow is dispelled, the heat of my 
torment abates.  Then is my tongue loosed to praise 
and thank thee, and thy Lord, Him Who did fashion 
thee and did prefer thee to all other handmaidens, 
and did give thee to drink from His sweet-scented 
lips, Who withdrew the veil of concealment from 
thy true being and made thee to be a true example for 
all thy kin to follow, and caused thee to be the 
fragrance of His garment for all of creation.  
     And at such times I strengthen my resolve to 
follow in thy footsteps, and to continue onward in 
the pathway of thy love; to take thee as my model, 
 
+P55 
and to acquire the qualities, and to make manifest 
that which thou didst desire for the triumph of this 
exalted and exacting, this most resplendent, sacred, 
and wondrous Cause.  
     Then intercede thou for me before the throne of 
the Almighty, O thou who, within the Company on 
High, dost intercede for all of humankind.  Deliver 
me from the throes of my mourning, and confer 
upon me and those who love thee in this nether 
world what will remove our afflictions, and bring 
assurance to our hearts, and quiet the winds of our 
sorrows, and console our eyes, and fulfil our hopes 
both in this world and the world to come--O thou 
whom God hast singled out from amongst all the 
countenances of the &Abha Paradise, and hast honoured 
in both His earth and His Kingdom on high, 
and of whom He has made mention in the Crimson 
Book, in words which wafted the scent of musk and 
scattered its fragrance over all the dwellers on earth!  
     O thou Greatest Holy Leaf!  If I cry at every 
moment out of a hundred mouths, and from each of 
these mouths I speak with a hundred thousand 
tongues, yet I could never describe nor celebrate thy 
heavenly qualities, which are known to none save 
only the Lord God; nor could I befittingly tell of 
even the transient foam from out the ocean of thine 
endless favour and grace.  
     Except for a very few, whose habitation is in the 
highest retreats of holiness, and who circle, in the 
furthermost Sanctuary, by day and by night about 
the throne of God, and are fed at the hand of the 
 
+P56 
&Abha Beauty on purest milk--except for these, no 
soul of this nether world has known or recognized 
thine immaculate, thy most sacred essence, nor has 
any befittingly perceived that ambergris fragrance 
of thy noble qualities, which richly anoints thy 
brow, and which issues from the divine wellspring 
of mystic musk; nor has any caught its sweetness.  
     To this bear witness the Company on High, and 
beyond them God Himself, the Supreme Lord of all 
the heavens and the earths:  that during all thy days, 
from thine earliest years until the close of thy life, 
thou didst personify the attributes of thy Father, the 
Matchless, the Mighty.  Thou wert the fruit of His 
Tree, thou wert the lamp of His love, thou wert the 
symbol of His serenity, and of His meekness, the 
pathway of His guidance, the channel of His blessings, 
the sweet scent of His robe, the refuge of His 
loved ones and His handmaidens, the mantle of His 
generosity and grace.  
     O thou Remnant of the divine light, O thou fruit 
of the Cause of our All-Compelling Lord!  From the 
hour when thy days did set, on the horizon of this 
Snow-White, this unique and Sacred Spot, our days 
have turned to night, our joys to great consternation; 
our eyes have grown blind with sorrow at thy 
passing, for it has brought back that supreme 
affliction yet again, that direst convulsion, the 
departing of thy compassionate Brother, our Merciful 
Master.  And there is no refuge for us anywhere 
except for the breathings of thy spirit, the spotless, 
the excellently bright; no shelter for us anywhere, 
 
+P57 
but through thine intercession, that God may inspire 
us with His own patience, and ordain for us in the 
other life the reward of meeting thee again, of 
attaining thy presence, of gazing on thy countenance, 
and partaking of thy light.  
     O thou Maid of &Baha!  The best and choicest of 
praises, and the most excellent and most glorious of 
salutations, rest upon thee, O thou solace of mine 
eyes, and beloved of my soul!  Thy grace to me was 
plenteous, it can never be concealed; thy love for me 
was great, it can never be forgotten.  Blessed, a 
thousand times blessed, is he who loves thee, and 
partakes of thy splendours, and sings the praises of 
thy qualities, and extols thy worth, and follows in 
thy footsteps; who testifies to the wrongs thou didst 
suffer, and visits thy resting-place, and circles 
around thine exalted tomb, by day and by night.  
Woe unto him, retribution be his, who disputes thy 
rank and station, and denies thine excellence, and 
turns himself aside from thy clear, thy luminous and 
straight path.  
     O ye distracted lovers of that winsome countenance!  
It is meet and fitting that in the gatherings of 
the loved ones of God and the handmaids of the 
Merciful in all the countries and lands of the East, 
these shining words and clear tokens from the 
Supreme Pen and His Interpreter's wonder-working 
hand--verses which were revealed for 
that priceless treasure of the Kingdom--should be 
repeatedly recited, most movingly with devotion 
and lowliness, and great attention and care, so as 
 
+P58 
to perpetuate her blessed memory, and extol her 
station, and out of love also for her incomparable 
beauty.  
     May the honoured members of the Central 
Assembly of Iran circulate these Writings, immediately 
and with great care, to the countries of the 
East, through their Local Spiritual Assemblies; for 
this task is a great bounty especially set apart for the 
trustees of His devoted loved ones in that noble 
homeland.  May God reward them with excellent 
rewards, in both this world of His, and in His 
Kingdom.  
 
25.  Moved by an unalterable devotion to the 
memory of the Greatest Holy Leaf, I feel prompted 
to share with you, and through you with the 
concourse of her steadfast lovers throughout the 
West, these significant passages+F1 which I have 
gleaned from various Tablets revealed in her honour 
by &Baha'u'llah and &Abdu'l-Baha.  
     Impregnated with that love after which the soul of 
a humanity in travail now hungers, these passages 
disclose, to the extent that our finite minds can 
comprehend, the nature of that mystic bond which, 
on one hand, united her with the Spirit of her 
almighty Father and, on the other, linked her so 
closely with her glorious Brother, the perfect 
Exemplar of that Spirit.  
     The memory of her who was a pattern of 
 
+F1 Included in Sections I and II.  
 
+P59 
goodness, of a pure and holy life, who was the 
embodiment of such heavenly virtues as only the 
privileged inmates of the uppermost chambers in the 
&Abha Paradise can fully appreciate, will long live 
enshrined in these immortal words--a memory the 
ennobling influence of which will remain an inspiration 
and a solace amid the wreckage of a sadly 
shaken world.  
     Conscious of the predominating share assumed, 
in recent years, by the American believers in alleviating 
the burden which that most exalted Leaf 
bore so heroically in the evening of her life, I can do 
no better than entrust into their hands these prized 
testimonies of the Founder of our Faith and of the 
Centre of His Covenant.  I feel confident that their 
elected representatives will take whatever measures 
are required for their prompt and wide circulation 
among their brethren throughout the West.  They 
will, thereby, be contributing still further to the 
repayment of the great debt they owe her in the 
prosecution of a mighty and divinely-appointed 
task.  
 
     26.  It was through the arrival of these pilgrims,+F1 
and these alone, that the gloom which had 
enveloped the disconsolate members of &Abdu'l-Baha's 
family was finally dispelled.  Through the 
agency of these successive visitors the Greatest Holy 
Leaf, who alone with her Brother among the 
 
+F1 From the West, after the ascension of &Baha'u'llah.  
 
+P60 
members of her Father's household had to confront 
the rebellion of almost the entire company of her 
relatives and associates, found that consolation 
which so powerfully sustained her till the very close 
of her life.  
 
     27.  With &Abdu'l-Baha's ascension, and more 
particularly with the passing of His well-beloved 
and illustrious sister the Most Exalted Leaf--the last 
survivor of a glorious and heroic age--there draws 
to a close the first and most moving chapter of 
&Baha'i history, marking the conclusion of the 
Primitive, the Apostolic Age of the Faith of 
&Baha'u'llah.  
 
     28.  The Fund associated with the beloved name 
of the Greatest Holy Leaf has been launched.  The 
uninterrupted continuation to its very end of so 
laudable an enterprise is now assured.  The poignant 
memories of one whose heart so greatly rejoiced at 
the rearing of the superstructure of this sacred House 
[the House of Worship in Wilmette, Illinois] will so 
energize the final exertions required to complete it as 
to dissipate any doubt that may yet linger in any 
mind as to the capacity of its builders to worthily 
consummate their task.  
 
     29.  BLESSED REMAINS PUREST BRANCH AND 
MASTER'S MOTHER SAFELY TRANSFERRED HALLOWED 
 
+P61 
PRECINCTS SHRINES MOUNT CARMEL.  LONG INFLICTED 
HUMILIATION WIPED AWAY.  MACHINATIONS COVENANT-BREAKERS 
FRUSTRATE PLAN DEFEATED.  CHERISHED 
WISH GREATEST HOLY LEAF FULFILLED.  SISTER 
BROTHER MOTHER WIFE &ABDU'L-BAHA REUNITED ONE 
SPOT DESIGNED CONSTITUTE FOCAL CENTRE &BAHA'I 
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTITUTIONS AT FAITH'S WORLD 
CENTRE.  SHARE JOYFUL NEWS ENTIRE BODY AMERICAN 
BELIEVERS.  
 
     30.  O loved ones of God, These two precious 
and most exalted treasures,+F1 these two keepsakes of 
the sacred Beauty of &Abha, have now been joined 
to the third trust from Him, that is, to the daughter 
of &Baha and His remnant, the token of the Master's 
Remembrance.  
     Their resting-places are in one area, on an 
elevation close by the Spot round which do circle the 
Concourse on High, and facing the Qiblih of the 
people of &Baha--&Akka, the resplendent city, and 
the sanctified, the luminous, the Most Holy Shrine.  
     Within the shadow of these honoured tombs has 
also been laid the remains of the consort+F2 of Him 
round Whom all names revolve.  
     For joy, the Hill of God is stirred at so high an 
honour, and for this most great bestowal the 
mountain of the Lord is in rapture and ecstasy.  
 
+F1 The remains of the Purest Branch and those of &Navvab.  
+F2 &Munirih &Khanum.  
 
+P62 
     31.  His+F1 nine-year-old son, later surnamed the 
`Most Great Branch', destined to become the Centre 
of His Covenant and authorized Interpreter of His 
teachings, together with His seven-year-old sister, 
known in later years by the same title+F2 as that of her 
illustrious mother, and whose services until the ripe 
old age of four score years and six, no less than her 
exalted parentage, entitle her to the distinction of 
ranking as the outstanding heroine of the &Baha'i 
Dispensation, were ... included among the exiles 
who were now bidding their last farewell to their 
native country.  
 
     32.  ...as a further testimony to the majestic 
unfoldment and progressive consolidation of the 
stupendous undertaking launched by &Baha'u'llah 
on that holy mountain, may be mentioned the 
selection of a portion of the school property situated 
in the precincts of the Shrine of the &Bab as a 
permanent resting-place for the Greatest Holy Leaf, 
the `well-beloved' sister of &Abdu'l-Baha, the `Leaf 
that hath sprung' from the `Pre-existent Root', the 
`fragrance' of &Baha'u'llah's `shining robe', elevated 
by Him to a `station such as none other woman hath 
surpassed', and comparable in rank to those immortal 
heroines such as Sarah, &Asiyih, the Virgin Mary, 
&Fatimih and &Tahirih, each of whom has outshone 
every member of her sex in previous Dispensations.  
 
+F1 &Baha'u'llah's.  
+F2 The Most Exalted Leaf.  
 
+P63 
     33.  The raising of this Edifice+F1 will in turn 
herald the construction, in the course of successive 
epochs of the Formative Age of the Faith, of several 
other structures...  
     These Edifices will, in the shape of a far-flung arc, 
and following a harmonizing style of architecture, 
surround the resting-places of the Greatest Holy 
Leaf, ranking as foremost among the members of 
her sex in the &Baha'i Dispensation, of her Brother, 
offered up as a ransom by &Baha'u'llah for the 
quickening of the world and its unification, and of 
their Mother, proclaimed by Him to be His chosen 
`consort in all the worlds of God'.  
 
+F1 The International Archives Building.  
 
+P64 
 
+P65  
                    IV 
           Passages from letters 
           written on behalf of 
              SHOGHI EFFENDI 
   
+P66 
 
+P67 
                    IV 
           Passages from letters 
           written on behalf of 
              SHOGHI EFFENDI 
   
     1.  Your touching words in connection with the 
sudden removal of the Greatest Holy Leaf from 
their+F1 midst have greatly alleviated the burden of 
sorrow that weighs so heavily upon their hearts and 
have demonstrated that in their great and irreparable 
loss the friends are faithfully sharing their sorrow 
and grief.  
     The passing of the Greatest Holy Leaf, so tragic in 
its suddenness, has, indeed, divested the Holy 
Family of its unique adornment and the &Baha'i 
world at large of one of its noblest and most 
precious members.  She was to us all not only a true 
friend but the real embodiment of those traits and 
characteristics, of that genuine and profound love 
that was born of God, and that we had learned to 
admire in the Master...  
     In this great loss that the followers of the Faith 
both in East and West have come to suffer our 
Guardian's share is the greatest and perhaps the most 
cruel.  His sole comfort, in this great calamity, is to 
 
+F1 Members of the Holy Family.  
 
+P68 
see the friends unitedly working for the spread of a 
Cause for which our departed &Khanum had given 
up all her life, and for the triumph of which she 
cherished the highest hopes.  The expressions of 
zealous enthusiasm and hope, of genuine self-abnegation 
and love that the American believers and 
especially our precious sister Mrs Agnes Parsons 
demonstrated in their last Convention meeting have 
greatly brightened the closing days of her life.+F1 
Shoghi Effendi trusts that her memory will increasingly 
serve to cheer and hearten the friends in their 
ever-widening activities.  
 
     2.  The passing of the Greatest Holy Leaf, so 
cruel in the feelings of unalterable grief that it has 
evoked, is, indeed, a tremendous loss to us all and 
particularly to our Guardian.  Her presence among 
us was such a source of inspiration and joy that we 
cannot too deeply grieve the immensity of our loss.  
She was a real mother to every one of us, a comforter 
in our pains and anxieties, and a friend in our 
moments of utter loneliness and despair.  But alas!  
 
+F1 Refers to the Annual Convention held in April 1932, at which 
+F1 the delegates and friends responded in an impressive manner 
+F1 to the need of the Fund associated with the name of the 
+F1 Greatest Holy Leaf, initiated in order to complete the exterior 
+F1 ornamentation of the House of Worship in Wilmette, Illinois.  
+F1 Mrs Parsons spontaneously removed a valuable pearl necklace 
+F1 from her neck to assist in meeting the Fund's goal.  See 
+F1 &Baha'i News, No. 62, May 1932 for a report of that 
+F1 Convention.  
 
+P69 
We failed to appreciate adequately what her 
presence among us meant and it is only now, when 
she has gone for ever, that we come to realize the 
irreparable character of our loss.  
     And yet, however deep our consciousness of her 
unexpected removal from our midst may be, we 
cannot but feel certain that from her heavenly retreat 
she is continually showering her blessings upon 
everyone of us and is interceding on our behalf so 
that we may recover our energies and unanimously 
arise and dedicate our lives to the service of her 
Father's glorious Cause.  
     Her memory will, assuredly, continue to inspire 
us for many, many long years and will prove, when 
the hour of adversity is at its darkest, to be our best 
sustainer.  
     May her glorious spirit inspire us with faith and 
hope, steel our energies and enable us to make every 
sacrifice in the path lighted by her saintly and 
eventful life.  
 
     3.  The ascension of the Greatest Holy Leaf is, 
indeed, an irreparable loss to us all and will continue 
to be deeply felt for many, many long years.  Her 
presence among us was such a source of blessings 
and inspiration!  She was to every one of us not only a 
friend but a real mother, through whose maternal 
care and love we had learned to feel and experience 
that consuming love which is born of God and 
which alone can galvanize the souls of men.  
 
+P70 
     Her departure from our midst, though cruel and 
heart-rending in its immediate results cannot but 
ultimately serve the very best interests of the Cause.  
For this invincible Faith of God has, ever since its 
inception in darkest Persia, grown and flourished 
amidst all sorts of tribulations and sufferings and has 
welcomed all these as providential forces destined to 
ensure its unity, promote its interests and consolidate 
its work.  
     Let us, therefore, not remain disconsolate and 
hopeless and withstand in a heroic way the shock 
occasioned by the passing of our beloved &Khanum.  
Her ascension is a challenge to us all, a challenge to 
our faith, to our sincerity and to our love.  
     May her memory continue to strengthen and 
deepen our spiritual insight and enable us to render 
the Faith as many services as we can.  
 
     4.  His grief is too immense and his loss too 
heavy to be adequately expressed in words.  But the 
many letters of condolence he has already received, 
and especially your message that indicated your 
profound attachment to our departed &Khanum, 
greatly comforted his sorrow-stricken heart and 
gave him the assurance that in this calamitous event 
the friends are amply sharing his grief.  
     However irreparable and heart-rending our loss 
may be, we cannot but thank God for having 
released our beloved Holy Leaf from the oppression 
and bondage of this world.  For more than eighty 
 
+P71 
years this Exalted Leaf bore with a fortitude that 
bewildered every one who had the privilege of 
knowing her, sufferings and tribulations that few of 
our present-day believers did experience.  And yet, 
what a joy and what a saintlike attitude she manifested 
all through her life.  Her angelic face was so 
calm, so serene in the very midst of sufferings and 
pains.  Not that she lacked tenderness of heart and 
sympathy.  But she could overcome her feelings and 
this because she had put all her trust in God.  
     And now that she has gone for ever we should 
rejoice at the thought that she is still living in our 
hearts and is animating our soul with a devotion, a 
courage, and a hope of which we are in such a dire 
need in these days of sufferings and hardships.  
     May the memory of her saintly life inspire you 
with faith and hope, cheer and strengthen your heart 
and make of you a servant worthy to promote and 
consolidate the interests of the Faith!  
 
     5.  The irreparable loss which the Faith has 
suffered through the passing of the Greatest Holy 
Leaf is too immense to be adequately expressed in 
words, and we cannot fully realize its significance at 
the present stage of the evolution of the Cause.  
Future generations stand in a better position to 
appreciate what her significance was during the 
early days of the Revelation and especially after the 
ascension of &Abdu'l-Baha.  
 
+P72 
     And now that she has gone for ever and is in 
direct communion with God we should rejoice at 
the thought that from the Realm Above she is 
watching over us all and is sending us her blessings.  
     May the memory of her saintly life be our 
comforter in our hours of sadness and despair, and 
may we learn through her example how to live the 
true life of the spirit, of self-abnegation and of 
service.  
 
     6.  In these days, when we are all mourning the 
loss of our beloved Greatest Holy Leaf, Shoghi 
Effendi's sole comfort is to see the friends as ever 
devoted and active and striving day and night to 
promote the teachings of the Cause.  
     However cruel our separation from &Bahiyyih 
&Khanum may be, especially at a time when her 
presence among us was such a source of inspiration 
and strength, yet we feel confident that from her 
Heavenly Retreat she is sending us her blessings 
and is quickening our weary souls.  
     Concerning the suspension of festivities for a 
period of nine months it should be made clear that 
what is meant by this is that all gatherings, whether 
outdoor or indoor, which are not of a strictly 
devotional character should be abolished all 
through the period of our mourning.  However, 
meetings and services that are wholly spiritual as 
well as those that are necessary for the carrying on 
 
+P73 
of the administration should continue to be held as 
usual.  
 
     7.  Your message of condolence and sympathy, 
dated July 22nd, 1932 which so fully conveyed your 
profound grief at the loss occasioned by the unexpected 
passing of the Greatest Holy Leaf was 
received and read with great interest.  The Guardian's 
sorrow was much relieved and the burden of 
his agonizing pain immensely alleviated.  He sincerely 
hopes that out of the pangs of this crushing 
calamity the Faith will strengthen its foundations 
and extend the sphere of its ever-widening influence.  
     Our loss is, indeed, immense and even irreparable.  
But our joy should also be great, for the 
Greatest Holy Leaf has at least been released from 
the bondage of this world after more than eighty 
years of continued suffering.  It would take me too 
long to relate in their fullness those incidents which 
eloquently proclaim her as one of the greatest 
sufferers the world has yet seen.  And yet, with what 
a fortitude she bore all these tribulations for she was 
confident in the grace of God.  
     Though now gone for ever from our midst we 
should be hopeful that from her Celestial Realm she 
will send us her blessings and will extend to us her 
help.  Her memory will continue to cheer and 
strengthen our souls, deepen our spiritual insight 
and bring us to a strong determination to serve till 
 
+P74 
the very last breath of our life a Cause for which our 
departed &Khanum gave up her entire existence and 
for the future of which she cherished the brightest 
hopes.  
 
     8.  ...The news of the Memorial Service you 
had held for the Greatest Holy Leaf gave him the 
assurance that the friends are faithfully sharing his 
grief and are demonstrating in a befitting manner 
their profound devotion to one whose very life was 
an example of faithfulness and sincerity, of self-abnegation 
and love.  
     The ascension of the Greatest Holy Leaf is, 
indeed, both a calamity and a blessing.  It is an 
overwhelming calamity since it has deprived us of 
the presence in our very midst of the last Remnant of 
that Heroic age of the Cause that gave birth to so 
many noble and faithful souls.  The mere presence of 
our beloved &Khanum among us was a source of 
inspiration and blessing.  And now that she has gone 
we cannot too deeply deplore the immensity of our 
loss.  
     But thanks to God for having released her, after so 
many long years of agonizing pain, of the bondage      
of this world and given her the priceless privilege of 
being in direct communion with God.  
     May her everlasting spirit continue to guide our 
efforts and enable us to serve a Cause, for which she 
suffered so much, with all our might, our enthusiasm 
and hope.  
 
+P75 
     9.  The letter from that spiritual friend has 
reached the beloved Guardian, and he is aware of 
your bitter grieving over the calamitous news that a 
most glorious fruit of the Holy Tree, the Most 
Exalted Leaf, the Remnant of &Baha, has passed 
away.  
     This disastrous event has had an effect on the 
Guardian so terrible that no pen can describe it nor 
paper bear the words; for that bright and surpassingly 
fair presence, that quintessence of the perfections 
and attributes of God, was his close companion, 
and the consolation of his heart, so that his 
separation from her whom the world wronged, and 
the ascension of that loved one of the community of 
love, was unspeakably hard for him to bear.  
     She was a divine trust, a treasure of the Kingdom, 
and she spent all the days of her precious life as an 
exile and a captive, and her every priceless hour was 
passed under tests and afflictions and ordeals that she 
endured at the hands of merciless foes.  From early 
childhood she had her share of the sufferings of 
&Baha'u'llah, subjected even as He was to hardships 
and calamities, and she was as well the partner 
in sorrows and tribulations of &Abdu'l-Baha.  
     For her there was never a night of peaceful sleep, 
for her no day when she found rest, and always, like 
a moth, would her comely person circle about the 
bright candle of the Faith.  The words of her mouth 
were ever to glorify the &Abha Beauty, her only 
thought and her high purpose were to proclaim the 
Cause of God and to protect His Law, while the 
 
+P76 
dearest wish of her glowing heart was to waft far and 
wide the sweet breathings of the Lord.  
     Her heavenly ways were a model for the people of 
&Baha, and those who dwell in the pavilions of 
devotion and the denizens of the &Abha Paradise 
found in her celestial attributes their prototype and 
their guide.  Glory be to God, Who created her, 
fashioned her, called her into being, sent her forth 
and revealed her, whose like the eye of the world had 
never seen.  
     The Guardian sends his message of consolation to 
your honoured self and all the friends, and he says 
that it is fitting that the righteous should hold fast to 
the cord of resignation and acquiescence, and adorn 
themselves with the ornaments of faithfulness and 
servitude, and take for their example that priceless 
treasure of the Kingdom.  
 
     10.  The letter dated 5 August 1932, from that 
spiritual friend has been received by the Guardian of 
the Cause of God, may our lives be sacrificed for 
him, and he has been informed of your receiving his 
telegram regarding the ascension of that matchless 
fruit of the Tree of Glory, the Most Exalted Leaf.  
     There is no question but that the burden of grief 
on his sorrowing heart, because of this terrible 
ordeal, this great calamity, is heavier than minds can 
conceive, or words can tell.  That gem of immortality, 
that precious and exalted being, was the one 
consolation, the one companion of the Guardian in 
 
+P77 
his sorrow-filled life; and she, with her sweet 
encouragement, her gentle words, her never-ceasing, 
soothing care of him, her smiles that came like 
fair winds from heavenly gardens, could always 
gladden and refresh his spirit.  
     No one has understood the tender, spiritual and 
celestial bond between the Guardian and her who 
was the Remnant of &Baha, nor can any mind 
conceive that plane of being, nor reckon its sublimity.  
     During her whole life span, that heavenly being 
was subjected to ordeals and tribulations.  She confronted 
the attacks of the hostile, and she suffered 
afflictions any one of which could well have shattered 
a mountain of iron.  And yet the sweet and 
comely face of that spirit-like dove of holiness, was 
wreathed till her very last hour in life-giving smiles, 
nor did that patience and endurance, that greatness, 
that majesty and dignity, ever desert her delicate and 
fragile person.  
     She who was the trust left by &Baha'u'llah had no 
other aim nor goal but these:  to proclaim the Cause 
of God and exalt His Word; to praise and glorify the 
Blessed Beauty's name; to bear &Abdu'l-Baha in 
mind and serve Him ever; to pity the sorely-troubled 
and give them endless, loving care; to 
cherish and comfort them, and bring them joy.  
There is, then, good reason, that with the passing of 
this peerless gem, this precious, matchless pearl, we 
should rend our garments in mourning, and that our 
eyes should stream with bitter tears.  
 
+P78 
     The Guardian conveys his message of condolence, 
and says that in this severest of afflictions, it 
would befit the people of &Baha to hold fast to 
resignation and acquiescence, and to rise up and 
loyally serve the Faith, taking for their example that 
priceless treasure of the &Abha Paradise.  
 
     11.  What you had written concerning the 
memorial gatherings of men and women believers 
to mourn the Most Exalted Leaf, who was the 
peerless fruit of the Holy Tree, and to commemorate 
the ascension of her who was the most glorious 
trust left on earth by the Lord--may the souls of 
holy men and women be a sacrifice for her sacred 
resting-place--has been received by the Guardian.  
     It cannot be imagined to what a degree this 
terrible and calamitous event has saddened him, 
and, more than words can tell, clouded the radiance 
of his heart.  For that holy being, that resplendent 
person, with all her heart and soul and endless love, 
had ever fostered and cherished him in the warm 
embrace of her celestial tenderness.  She was his 
single, dear companion, she was his one and only 
consolation in the world, and that is why he is so 
burdened down with the passing of her high and 
stately presence, and why the departure of that 
comely spirit is so hard for him to bear.  
     She who was left in trust by &Baha'u'llah was the 
symbol of His infinite compassion, the day star in 
the heaven of His bounty and grace.  That sanctified 
 
+P79 
spirit revealed the loving-kindness of Him who was 
the Beauty of the All-Glorious, and was the welling 
spring of the favours and bestowals of Him Who was 
the Lord, the Most High.  She was the comforter of 
anyone who grieved, the solace of any with a broken 
heart.  She, that Remnant of &Baha, was a loving 
mother to the orphan, and for the hapless and bewildered 
it was she who would find a way.  Her holy life 
lit up the world; her heavenly qualities and ways were 
a standard for people all over the earth.  Like a cloud of 
grace, she showered down gifts, and her bestowals, 
like the morning winds, refreshed the soul.  
     Stranger and friend alike were captured by her 
loving-kindness, her spiritual nature, her unceasing 
care for them and tender ways; enamoured of her 
great indulgence toward them, and how she favoured 
them and cherished them.  The mind could only 
marvel at that subtle and ethereal being, at the 
majesty and greatness of her, and the heavenly 
modesty, and the forbearance and long suffering.  
Even in the thick of the worst ordeals, she would 
smile like an opening rose, and no matter how dark 
and calamitous the times, like a bright candle she 
would shed her light.  
     The Guardian sends messages of heartfelt condolence 
to all of you, and asks you to be submissive and 
acquiescent and patient, and loyally to arise and 
serve, and take for your model that precious treasure 
of the &Abha Paradise.  
     You had asked the Guardian as to the nine months 
of mourning, during which all &Baha'i festivities are 
 
+P80 
to be suspended.  His answer is that this refers to nine 
solar months.  He says further that the blessed and 
exalted Leaf ascended at one hour after midnight, on 
the eve of Friday, July 15.  
 
     12.  ...He is eagerly awaiting to see the friends 
as ever burning with the desire to serve a Cause for 
the sake of which our departed Holy Leaf gave up 
her entire existence.  
     May her glorious spirit cheer your hearts, strengthen 
your faith and inspire you with renewed 
courage and hope.  
 
     13.  His loss is too immense to be adequately 
expressed in words.  But his joy is also great.  For 
such calamitous events, though cruel in their 
immediate effects, nevertheless, serve to stimulate 
the friends and quicken their souls.  
     Ours, therefore, is the opportunity to arise and 
serve the Cause and put all our trust in God.  Surely, 
He will guide our steps and will inspire us with the 
necessary enthusiasm and strength.  
     May the immortal spirit of our departed 
&Khanum quicken our energies and give fresh lustre 
to our endeavours for the greater extension of the 
Cause.  
 
+P81 
     14.  The profound sorrow occasioned by the 
sudden passing of the Greatest Holy Leaf, as well as 
the unnumbered messages of sympathy received 
from friends and believers in East and West, all of 
which the Guardian acknowledged in person, have 
caused the unavoidable delay in giving his immediate 
attention to various matters referred to in your 
communications to him.  He deeply regrets the 
obstacles which stood in his way and which by their                        
very nature he found them impossible to surmount.  
 
     15.  The Guardian of the Cause of God has 
received your letter of 21 July 1932, telling of your 
and the other friends' profound distress on receiving 
word of this calamity, this dire ordeal, that is, the 
ascension of the Most Exalted Leaf, that brightest 
fruit of the Eternal Tree.  
     It is certain that this anguish, this harrowing 
event, has reached into the very depths of his being, 
and oppressed and darkened his radiant heart more 
than words can ever tell.  For the subtle and spiritual 
attachment that the Guardian felt for her, and the 
heavenly tenderness and affection between that 
lovely fruit of the divine Lote-Tree and himself, was 
a bond so strong as to defy description, nor can the 
mind encompass that exalted state.  That secret is 
a secret well-concealed, a treasured mystery unplumbed, 
and to a plane such as this, the minds of 
the believers can never find their way.  On this 
account the Guardian's anguish at being parted from 
 
+P82 
that bright and comely denizen of Heaven is beyond 
our conceiving.  
     She who was a sparkling light of God, she who 
was so full of grace--that widespread ray of 
Heaven's splendour, that sign of God's mercy--was 
made to appear with all perfections, all goodly 
attributes, all blessed ways; and never had the 
world's eye gazed upon such a welling spring of 
tender love, of pity and compassion, and never will 
it behold again such a gem of loving-kindness, such 
a fount of God's munificence.  
     How many a night did she whom the world 
wronged spend as a prisoner, worn with care, 
tormented, banished from her home.  How many a 
day did she live through as an exile and a captive!  
There was no venom of affliction, at the hands of 
this Faith's foes, that was not given her to drink, no 
arrow of cruelty but struck her holy breast.  Yet in 
spite of the endless tribulations and disasters, she 
who was a spirit of holiness and a songster of 
Heaven, would even in the midst of dire ordeals, her 
face aglow, bloom like a rose.  
     The Guardian sends messages of consolation to 
you and all the friends in this bereavement, and he 
says that in this calamitous time all must bow down 
their heads and be acquiescent, arise in faithful 
service to His Cause, and model themselves upon 
that most exalted, sacred and resplendent presence.  
 
     16.  The Guardian's anguish, because of this 
tragic occurrence, is such that it can neither be 
 
+P83 
plumbed nor described in words.  That sublime and 
gloried Leaf, that precious jewel of the Kingdom, 
was the one great solace of his life; she was his 
glorious companion, and her disappearance, and the 
separation from her, and her ascending into the 
heavenly presence and court of her Lord was the 
direst ordeal to be visited upon the people of &Baha.  
Alas for any future time that might produce such a 
calamity, when the world's eye might see its like.  
     That sacred treasure, that jewel of Heaven, was 
the very sign and token of spiritual attributes and 
qualities and perfections, the very model of high 
honour and nobility and heavenly ways.  The sufferings 
she bore in the pathway of God were the 
cruellest ones, the afflictions that assailed her were 
the severest of all.  Fortitude was the rich dress she 
wore, serenity and tranquil strength were her splendid 
robe, virtue and detachment, purity and 
chastity, were all her jewels, and tenderness, care 
and love for humankind, her beauty's bright 
adornings.  
     The Guardian conveys his message of consolation 
and comfort, enjoining submission and acquiescence 
in this calamity, and the need for arising to 
serve and to be steadfast, and to take for our model 
that gem of the &Abha Paradise.  
 
     17.  Indeed, the Greatest Holy Leaf, the Trust of 
&Baha'u'llah amongst us, was the emblem of His 
boundless grace, a luminary shining in the heaven of 
 
+P84 
tender mercy and gracious providence, the embodiment 
of the manifold favours of the &Abha Beauty, a 
repository of the bounty and loving-kindness so 
characteristic of the &Bab, the Exalted One.  To 
every disconsolate one she was an affectionate 
comforter, to every heart-broken and grief-stricken 
soul, a token of unfailing sympathy, of kindliness, 
of cheer and comfort.  Her blessed life was a source 
of spiritual illumination for the whole world and her 
noble traits and heavenly attributes served as a 
shining example, an object of emulation for all 
mankind.  Like the showers of heavenly grace, her 
generosity knew no bounds, and as the breeze of 
celestial blessing and favour, she breathed a new life 
into every soul.  Both friends and strangers were 
drawn by her sense of spirituality, her tenderness 
and refinement, her unfailing solicitude, and were 
attracted by the magic of her unbounded affection 
and goodwill.  That heavenly being displayed 
throughout her life such evidence of glory and 
dignity, such manifestations of majesty and greatness, 
such a degree of patience and resignation as 
bewildered the minds and souls.  In the midst of trials 
her radiant face bore the likeness of a sweet rose and 
in moments of sore tribulation she was resplendent 
as a brilliant candle.  
 
     18.  The Guardian trusts that the explanation he 
has given by wire regarding the suspension for a 
period of nine months of &Baha'i religious festivity 
 
+P85 
has been made clear.  The Nineteen Day Feast being 
of a quasi-administrative character should continue 
to be held, but should be conducted with the utmost 
simplicity and should be devoid of any features 
associated with feasts and entertainment.  The 
celebration of &Naw-Ruz, the anniversary of the 
birth of &Baha'u'llah and of the &Bab should be 
altogether cancelled as a token of our deep mourning 
for so distinguished and precious a member of 
&Baha'u'llah's family.  The period of nine months 
should be reckoned from the 15th of July to the 15th 
of April.  
 
     19.  The loss of the Greatest Holy Leaf will be 
bitterly felt by all those friends who had the pleasure 
and privilege to meet her.  She always kept such a 
wonderful atmosphere of joy and hope around her 
that was bound to influence those that were present 
and help them to go out into the world with added 
zeal and determination to consecrate all in the path of 
God.  
     The only consolation of Shoghi Effendi is in the 
knowledge that she has been delivered from earthly 
worries and physical weakness and that she is now in 
the presence of &Baha'u'llah, her Father and Lord, 
enjoying the infinite blessings of His eternal Kingdom.  
 
     20.  Even though during these last years she was 
weak and most of the time confined to her room, yet 
 
+P86 
she was a source of constant joy and inspiration to 
those that met her.  The Guardian feels her loss 
tremendously because the greatest part of his leisure 
hours he used to spend in her company.  
     His only comfort is that she has been delivered 
from the worries and weaknesses of a body that 
could no more withhold her spirit and help her to 
express all her desire in meeting the friends and 
serving them.  
     At present, in the presence of her Father and Lord 
we trust she is remembering us and asking for us His 
divine grace and blessings.  
 
     21.  The passing away of the Greatest Holy Leaf 
was a loss every &Baha'i will feel deeply if only he 
stops to think about it.  She was such a precious soul 
and so radiantly happy and hopeful even under most 
adverse circumstances.  Every believer that came in 
contact with her left her presence with a more 
determined spirit of service and self-sacrifice.  Both 
Shoghi Effendi and the rest of the &Baha'is will 
mourn her loss bitterly.  Their only consolation can 
be her own deliverance from a life of hardship and 
difficulties, and her entrance into a realm which is 
naught but eternal bliss and infinite divine grace.  
 
     22.  Even though the Greatest Holy Leaf has left 
us in body she is with us in spirit, inspiring us in our 
work and beseeching for us God's loving mercy and 
 
+P87 
fatherly care.  She will never forget her loving 
friends nor leave them in their woes.  
     Shoghi Effendi was very sad to hear of your 
difficulties, especially as they have encompassed you 
at an age when you cannot confront them but must 
have comfort and peace.  You should, however, take 
courage and resign to the will of God when you see 
what the Greatest Holy Leaf had to face during her 
life.  All you may suffer is nothing compared to what 
she had to endure; and yet how joyous and hopeful 
she used always to be!  
     This is the way of the world.  The greatest among 
us seems to be the one who has suffered most and 
withstood best the battles of life.  
 
     23.  Shoghi Effendi wishes me to acknowledge 
the receipt of your letter dated August 25th 1932 and 
to extend his deep appreciation for your kind words 
of sympathy.  This loss is a thing that will be bitterly 
felt by every &Baha'i throughout the world, 
because she used to be a source of inspiration to 
every one of them.  The mere coming into her 
presence and thinking of the trials and difficulties she 
had to pass through in her life, was sufficient to 
create in us new hope and arouse us to stronger 
determination to promote the Cause she suffered 
for.  
 
     24.  You should be very happy to have had the 
privilege of meeting her upon this physical plane of 
 
+P88 
existence, for the world has seen only very few such 
souls who have suffered so much for the sake of God 
and yet kept their cheer and uttered words of hope 
and encouragement to those who were around 
them.  What a source of inspiration she was to the 
pilgrims who came from the four corners of the 
world to seek spirituality and attain a new birth by 
visiting the Holy Shrines.  They should surely 
remember those blessed moments they spent in her 
room or in her presence elsewhere, and remembering 
her suffering, take courage in confronting the 
problems of their life.  May God help us all to follow 
her example and like her be a blessing to others.  
 
     25.  Surely there is nothing that will console the 
Guardian more than the happy news that the Cause 
for which the Greatest Holy Leaf lived and suffered 
is gradually spreading and embracing the whole of 
the people of the world.  
     She is undoubtedly conscious of our activities, 
following our work and impatiently awaiting the 
result of our battles.  Let her passing, therefore, be a 
source of added sacrifice and more energetic striving 
on the part of her devoted friends and lovers.  
 
     26.  These nine months during which the Guardian 
has asked the friends to discard feast days, are 
meant to be months of mourning for the passing 
away of the Greatest Holy Leaf.  The friends should 
 
+P89 
also use it as a period of redoubled energy in serving 
the Cause in expression of our deep love for her as 
well as for the Cause she so much suffered for.  
 
     27.  Surely no matter what we say about her still 
we have not done justice to the abounding love she 
had and the services she rendered to &Baha'u'llah 
and the Master.  Her life was full of events, full of 
sacrifices in the path of God.  Ever since her childhood 
she had to endure hardships and share the exile 
and persecution that &Baha'u'llah had to suffer.  In 
her face one could easily read the history of the 
Cause from its earliest days to the present moment.  
     Notwithstanding all this she never grumbled nor 
lost her faith in the future.  She kept cheerful and 
tried to give cheer to others.  She was a real source of 
inspiration to every person that met her.  
     The only adequate way to show our love and 
devotion to her is to arise and serve the Cause for 
which she so earnestly laboured during all her 
mortal life.  Her deeds and sacrifices should act as 
examples for us to follow.  
 
     28.  Indeed it would have been for you such a joy 
to meet the Greatest Holy Leaf during her earthly 
life, but the Guardian does not wish you to feel 
depressed about it; this beloved soul will from the 
Heaven of her Almighty Father guide you to serve 
the Cause which has been so dear to her.  Shoghi 
 
+P90 
Effendi values your sincere sympathy in this irreparable 
loss; he hopes that we all will follow the 
example of her saintly life.  
 
     29.  He fully appreciates the deep sorrow that 
you, as well as the other friends, feel for the passing 
away of the Greatest Holy Leaf.  All those who met 
her cannot feel but an emptiness in their hearts.  She 
was always such a source of courage and hope to 
those pilgrims that came from all parts of the world 
and had the pleasure of meeting her, that they left 
her presence with added hope and greater determination 
to serve the Cause and sacrifice their all in its 
path.  This was especially true of them after the 
passing away of the Master when they felt that she 
was the only worthy remnant of &Baha'u'llah's 
immediate kin.  
     May her passing stir the friends to greater measures 
of sacrifice and direct their attention towards 
the spiritual duties that have been laid upon their 
shoulders.  
 
     30.  He is sure that all the &Baha'is throughout 
the world share with him in this sorrow, for she was 
a source of comfort and inspiration to them all.  No 
one left her presence without being deeply impressed 
by her spirit.  All the sufferings that she had 
endured during her life and that had left their traces 
upon her feeble form, had not in the least affected 
 
+P91 
her spirit of joy and hopefulness.  She liked to see the 
people happy, and exerted all her efforts to make it 
easy for them to realize it.  
     How badly we need such souls in the world at 
present when it seems so full of sorrows and discouragements!  
Every one is suffering and no person to 
give them courage and brighten their hearts.  
     Shoghi Effendi hopes that the friends will follow 
her example and become a source of inspiration to the 
world at large, giving hope to the depressed and joy 
to the disconsolate.  Moreover, he trusts that her 
passing will operate as a great impetus in our services 
to the Cause for which she suffered so long and so 
hard.  
 
     31.  He deeply appreciates your sincere, well-expressed 
reference, to the tribute he has written to 
the dearly beloved Greatest Holy Leaf.  You cannot 
imagine to what an extent our dear Guardian has, in 
this loss, been deprived for ever of the sustaining 
influence and kindness that this Most Exalted Leaf 
used to shower daily upon him.  In this beautiful 
Tribute we can trace the life of this beautiful soul, 
witness with anguish all the sufferings and deprivations 
that she has endured.  Now we should, all of us, 
try in turn to follow her saintly path and direct all our 
energy to serve the Cause, which has been so dear to 
her.  
 
     32.  ...He was deeply touched by the strong 
attachment of the friends to one who, besides being 
 
+P92 
the beloved daughter of &Baha'u'llah, exemplified 
perhaps more than anyone the true spirit that 
animates His teachings.  His sincere hope is that your 
love for our departed Greatest Holy Leaf will attain 
such depth and intensity as to enable you to follow 
on her footsteps and to carry out with increasing 
devotion and vigour all that she cherished so much 
during the entire course of her earthly life.  The 
memory of her saintly life will undoubtedly sustain 
and feed your energies and will provide you with 
that spiritual potency of which we are all in such a 
great need.  
 
     33.  The steps of her holy resting-place represent 
Local Spiritual Assemblies, not individual believers.  
The columns, that is the pillars, are like the National 
Spiritual Assemblies, while the dome, which is 
raised following the placing of the columns, symbolizes 
the Universal House of Justice which, in 
accordance with the Master's Will and Testament 
must be elected by the secondary Houses of Justice, 
that is, the National Spiritual Assemblies of East and 
West.  
 
+P93 
                       V 
                  Letters of 
            THE GREATEST HOLY LEAF 
 
+P94 
 
+P95 
                       V 
                  Letters of 
            THE GREATEST HOLY LEAF 
 
     1.  O Leaf of Paradise!  
     Loose your tongue at all times in gratitude for the 
blessings of the Beloved of the Worlds, for you are 
always mentioned in His Glorious and Sanctified 
Presence, and you are ever in the hearts of His 
maidservants.  The pen is unable to describe the 
depths of our longing, nor can the tongue recount 
the love concealed within our hearts.  Should you 
look into the mirror of your own heart, which is free 
from the defilements of this world of dust, you 
would clearly see the truth of what has been set 
forth.  
     From the time of your departure no day passes 
without mention being made of your name.  Please 
God you may in your days and nights hold fast to the 
sure handle of detachment, and be occupied in the 
remembrance of God, the Wondrous, the All-Glorious.  
     There is no blessing greater than attainment unto 
His Holy Presence.  Thank God you attained this 
bounty.  
 
+P96 
     May the spiritually-minded son, &Mirza 
&Badi'u'llah, God willing, be always safe in the 
stronghold of God's care and protection.  
 
     2.  I feel prompted to offer my sincere best 
wishes to you and to express the agony of separation 
that has deeply affected me.  First of all let me say that 
I received with the hand of gratitude and thankfulness 
your kind letter which bore the full abundance 
of your love and amply portrayed the noble traits of 
your nature, so richly adorned with laudable characteristics.  
In truth, I always pay tribute to your 
excellent qualities and eagerly yearn to set my eyes 
upon your countenance.  I often recall those days 
when I had the delightful pleasure of your company 
and indulged in the fruits of your brilliant sense of 
humour.  Perhaps the days of reunion shall come 
again through the favour of the Lord of grace and 
bounty.  I fervently pray that God--glorified and 
exalted be He--may endue your life with vigour and 
happiness and enable you to achieve your heart's 
desire.  Moreover, I beseech Him--exalted is He--to 
grant me the pleasure of meeting you again very 
soon.  Indeed, He is nigh and readily answers the 
call.  I hereby offer my best greetings and befitting 
salutations to your revered person, and may God 
perpetuate your life.  Every one here enquires about 
your distinguished self and sends high expressions 
of praise and compliment to you.  May God prolong 
your life.  
 
+P97 
     3.  The letter in which that leaf had expressed the 
ardent longing of her heart and revealed the depth of 
her devotion has received my eager attention.  
     Indeed, the voice of lamentation that the loved 
ones of God and His devoted servants have raised on 
the occasion of this terrible adversity, this grievous 
calamity, has caused the fire of His bereavement to 
rage more fiercely than ever.  In reality no pen can 
depict the poignant feeling that surges in our hearts.  
Every expression would prove utterly inadequate, 
even less than the eye of a needle, inasmuch as words 
and syllables are incapable of conveying the 
intensity of this dire suffering.  They are but a tiny 
drop compared to an ocean.  Even in the vast 
immensity of inner significances and expositions 
nothing can portray this calamitous event.  
Moreover, the tale of how these prisoners have been 
consumed by the fire of bereavement is interminable.  
During this dark and dreadful calamity, and to 
this God bears me witness, our souls melted and our 
eyes unceasingly rained with tears.  
     Nevertheless, when faced with the irrevocable 
decree of the Almighty, the vesture that best befits
us in this world is the vesture of patience and 
submission, and the most meritorious of all deeds is 
to commit our affairs into His hands and to surrender 
ourselves to His Will.  Therefore, it behoves that 
leaf to take fast hold on the handle of resignation and 
radiant acquiescence and to strictly adhere to the 
cord of patience and long-suffering.  God willing, 
through His aid and heavenly confirmation you may 
 
+P98 
be enabled to exalt His Word and to render 
exemplary service to His Cause, that perchance the 
ears of all created things may be purged of the tales 
of bygone ages and become endued with the capacity 
to hearken to the holy verses that the Lord of all 
men has proclaimed.  Indeed, this is the underlying 
purpose of man's existence during the brief period of 
his earthly life.  Please God, we may all be confirmed 
and aided to achieve this.  
     Every manner of description that I use, and every 
form of symbolic expression that I conceive will fail 
to convey the extent of the ardent love and affection 
that I cherish for you; however, it causes the fire of 
love to glow more intensely and to burn more 
brightly.  Therefore, I had better confine myself to 
these few lines.  
     At the court of the presence of the Most Mighty 
Branch--may the lives of them that yearn after Him 
and are wholly devoted to Him be sacrificed for His 
holy presence--your name has been mentioned and 
you became the recipient of His special favours.  
 
     4.  Despite our overwhelming sorrows and 
afflictions, our heart-burning and depth of woes, 
you are always in our thoughts and we call to mind 
your cheerful face.  When we visit the Most Holy 
Shrine, the Point round which revolve the people of 
the world, we offer our prayers, and visit that Sacred 
Spot on your behalf, and on behalf of all the friends, 
particularly the well-assured, the faithful and loyal 
 
+P99 
handmaids of the Merciful.  We have prayed and will 
continue to pray at the Threshold of the Tomb of the 
Blessed Beauty for your success, and that of your 
relatives.  Likewise in the presence of `Him Whom 
God hath purposed' you are always remembered.  
Several days ago He retired to the Cave of &Khidr,+F1 
and that verdant spot has been blessed by the steps of 
our Master, `Him round Whom all names revolve'.  
He intends to stay there for a while, so that He may 
have some respite from His countless concerns and 
cares.  
     For the most part your previous letters have been 
answered, but you have not acknowledged receipt.  
This letter is in reply to your recent missive, so that 
you will be confident that we are, under all conditions, 
thinking of you.  
     Should you enquire about these bereaved ones, 
through the grace of the Lord and the bounties of 
His divine Mystery, we are all well, but our grief 
knows no bounds.  We supplicate at the Threshold of 
the Eternal and Almighty Beloved that He may 
unlock before us the doors of delight, awaken the 
heedless and those in deep slumber, and grant the 
exponents of violation a sense of justice, so that its 
dust may settle down, that this dissension be wiped 
out, and once again we may taste the sweetness of 
the days of bliss.  
     O Lord!  Graciously enable this servant of Thine as 
well as those who supplicate tearfully before Thy 
face and have turned towards Thee in their affliction 
 
+F1 Elijah.  
 
+P100 
to achieve unity, harmony, friendliness and fellowship, 
that they may magnify Thy virtues in the 
daytime and in the night season, may chant Thy holy 
words, may recite verses from Thy heavenly Book, 
may eagerly set their hearts toward the retreats of 
Thy holiness, yearning to behold the vision of Thy 
grandeur.  O Lord!  Fulfil their hearts' desires, gladden 
their bosoms with the shining splendour of the 
Centre of Thy Covenant, illumine their eyes and 
rejoice their souls with the goodly gifts of the light of 
harmony.  Verily Thou art the Lord of the Day of 
Judgement.  
 
     5.  It is my earnest hope that you, His distinguished 
leaf, together with the other maidservants of    
the All-Merciful in that land, may be so enkindled by 
the flame set ablaze by the hand of God as to illumine 
the whole world through the quickening energy of 
the love of God, and that through the eloquence of 
your speech, the fluency of your tongue, and the 
confirmations of the Holy Spirit you will be empowered 
to expound divine wisdom in such manner 
that men of eloquence, and the scholars and sages of 
the world, will be lost in bewilderment.  This indeed 
would not be hard for Him.  
 
     6.  O exalted leaf, O distinguished friend!  May 
the glory of God and His praise, His bounty and 
 
+P101 
blessing rest upon you inasmuch as you have 
remained faithful to the Covenant of God and His 
Testament.  
     Your letter so fine and ornate, a gift from the 
Paradise of the love of God, and a dear token of the 
celestial Garden of divine knowledge, has been 
received, and perfumed with its spiritual and 
ethereal fragrance the nostrils of this maidservant of 
God, this yearning prisoner.  
     Praise be to God that He has enabled you, His 
well-assured leaf, to magnify at all times the glory of 
His gracious countenance, has sustained your life 
through the remembrance of His Beauty, has suffered 
you to rid yourself of all attachment to any one 
save Him that you may continually commune with 
His love.  He has graciously assisted you to remain 
faithful to His weighty and irrefutable Testament, to 
cling tenaciously to the hem of the robe of the 
Centre of the Covenant of God, the All-Bountiful, 
and to fix your gaze entirely upon the luminous face 
of `Him Whom God hath purposed', the One `Who 
hath branched from the pre-existent Root'.  In truth, 
a myriad praises and thanksgiving should be offered 
in appreciation of this outpouring of divine favours 
and blessings.  We implore the Kingdom of our 
Lord, the All-Glorious, that He may continually 
waft upon you His vitalizing breaths, may enrapture 
you by the uplifting transports of His delight, may 
quicken you through His Holy Spirit and may grant 
you confirmation to serve His maidservants and His 
leaves.  
 
+P102 
     7.  May my life be sacrificed for those leaves who 
are steadfast in the Covenant of God--they whom 
the slander of the slanderer hinders not from holding 
fast to His divine Testament.  
     I yield praise to God and offer thanksgiving to the 
&Abha Beloved--may my spirit be offered up for 
every atom of the dust of His holy Threshold
--inasmuch as the animating breeze of holiness has 
wafted from the rose-garden of your love and 
fellowship.  By this is meant that your letter--a letter 
fraught with expressions of loving-kindness that 
that loved one of my heart and soul penned with 
such tender affection--has been received.  It brought 
immense happiness to the grief-stricken heart of this 
yearning prisoner and by perusing its contents my 
whole being has been flooded with ineffable gladness.  
Indeed, the nostrils of my heart have been 
perfumed by its sweet savours and the channel of my 
soul has become redolent with its vitalizing perfume, 
inasmuch as from its inner meaning the 
fragrances of heavenly praise and adoration were 
inhaled and from its words the sweet smell of 
attraction to the love of God was perceived.  In truth, 
every letter which serves to magnify the glory of the 
Ancient Beauty or to extol the virtues of the Most 
Great Name is sweeter than honey, for it imparts 
sweetness to the palate of the soul.  
     In brief, we all rejoice to know that you and the 
other handmaids of God in that region are enjoying 
good health, that they are all firm and steadfast in the 
Cause of God, are shining brightly and are enraptured 
 
+P103 
by His love; for this token of grace we have 
offered boundless praise at the Threshold of our 
forgiving Lord.  We are well acquainted with the 
matters you have mentioned in your letter, and in 
the luminous and holy presence of the peerless 
Servant of His Threshold, our Master, &Abdu'l-Baha
--may my life be sacrificed for Him--your name 
and the names of all the handmaids of God and of 
His enraptured leaves have been mentioned and 
words of praise were expressed by Him in your 
favour.  Be well assured that you are always remembered 
at the spiritual meetings and gatherings of the 
friends.  
 
     8.  From this hallowed and snow-white Spot, 
this blessed, heavenly Garden, wherefrom the fragrance 
of God is diffused to all regions, I hail you with 
salutations, most tender, most wondrous, and most 
glorious, and impart to you the most joyful tiding.  
This tiding serves as the sweet-smelling savour of 
His raiment to them that long to behold His face, it 
represents the highest aspiration of His steadfast 
leaves, it is the animating impulse for the happiness 
of the world, it is the source of ineffable gladness to 
the people of &Baha, a remedy to the afflicted, and a 
refreshing draught for the thirsty.  By the righteousness 
of God, O beloved friend, through this glad-tiding 
the ailing are cured and every mouldering 
bone is quickened.  This most joyful tiding is the 
news of the good health and well-being of the 
 
+P104 
blessed, the exalted, the holy person of &Abdu'l-Baha, 
`He Whom God hath purposed'--may the 
life of all created things be offered up for His 
oneness.  
 
     9.  A number of your spiritual sisters, namely 
the handmaidens who have embraced His Cause, 
have arrived here from Paris and the United States 
on pilgrimage.  They recently reached this blessed 
and luminous Spot and have had the honour to 
prostrate themselves at His Holy Threshold and to 
behold the radiant face of &Abdu'l-Baha, the Centre 
of the Covenant of Almighty God--may my life be 
offered up as a sacrifice for His sake.  We have now 
the pleasure of their company and commune with 
them in a spirit of utmost love and fellowship.  They 
all send loving greetings and salutations to you 
through the language of the heart.  
 
     10.  May the Light of Union radiate with greater 
clearness and brilliancy day by day among the 
people in your great country--for to this country 
God has given much and much is expected from it.  
But without harmony and love existing among 
those who call themselves &Baha'is, nothing will 
be seen from it whatsoever; for verily the Believers 
 
+P105 
are the pivots upon which the fate of nations hang; 
and a difference among two believers is quite 
sufficient to consume and destroy a whole country.  
The one who works for harmony and union among 
the hearts of the people in these days will receive the 
greatest blessings and the most abundant bounties.  
There is no greater work for one to do upon this 
earth than to try and unite the hearts of the 
people--and especially those who are calling upon 
the Holy Name of God.  
 
     11.  O my dear sister!  I have read what you 
wrote, and as I became aware of the content, I wept 
bitter tears.  Then I carried the letter itself to 
&Abdu'l-Baha and He read it from beginning to 
end.  These terrible events in Yazd call for cries and 
lamentation, and the shedding of tears of fire.  
     Although &Ali's foes, on the plains of &Karbila, 
came as a rushing torrent of affliction against the 
Prince of Martyrs,+F1 and even as ravening wolves, 
tore at the breasts of the favoured ones of the Court 
of Holiness, and wreaked their hate upon them and 
lifted their heads onto pikes--they leading out an 
expedition against the hapless victims, and carrying 
away all that these possessed--yet the span of that 
agony at &Karbila was but from the morning until 
noon, while the ordeal of the martyrs of Yazd lasted 
one entire month.  And further, the companions of 
the Prince of Martyrs--may the souls of all those 
 
+F1 The &Imam &Husayn.  
 
+P106 
killed on the holy Path be offered up for him!--made 
to defend themselves, and each one of them felled a 
number of those foes of &Ali's House, spilled out the 
others' blood, before being martyred themselves.  
But these innocent victims of Yazd looked on their 
murderers with smiles, and gently welcomed them, 
and in exchange for the swords' blows offered honey 
and milk.  Those set the blade to the victims' throats, 
but the martyrs presented them with sweets; those 
cursed and vilified them, while the martyrs implored 
God to forgive their murderers.  
     Although the slain on God's path at &Karbila were 
truly victims, helpless, innocent, so that the Concourse 
on High wept fiery tears over what the tyrants 
did in the desert there, still, we know that before 
every one of those great martyrs, some who battled 
against them fell down and died.  But the martyrs of 
Yazd, at the onslaught of the foe, and under the 
tyrant's sword, uttered not even an unseemly 
word...  
     Truly the harried survivors of these wronged ones 
have been subjected to the severest of ordeals, nor can 
any balm be found to soothe their wound, nor is there 
any antidote against this lethal drink.  For them, every 
new morning is a new martyrdom.  
     Praise be to God, through the grace and favour of 
the &Abha Beauty--may all souls be offered up for 
those who are slain upon His path--the friends 
everywhere have arisen to do what they can for these 
survivors.  But whatever we may do in such circumstances 
and however much we may sacrifice, it is 
 
+P107 
still not enough, and they merit more.  I hope that, 
with the confirmations of the &Abha Kingdom, we 
may be enabled to offer up our hearts and souls for 
the children of the martyrs, and think of ourselves as 
the servants of those noble ones.  
 
     12.  Concerning the remnants of the martyrs' 
families, you have mentioned how eager they are to 
hear a word of commendation assuring them that 
this act of self-sacrifice and martyrdom will be 
acceptable in the sight of God.  Therefore, I mentioned 
this matter in His holy presence and I am glad 
to say that, in compliance with His instructions, a 
compilation containing most of the Tablets which 
have been revealed in honour of the martyrs of Yazd 
and elsewhere has been prepared.  I am now sending 
it to you together with this letter.  You may peruse 
these Tablets and then recite them in the presence of 
the remnants of those who have offered up their 
lives in the path of God, that they may be fully aware 
that those martyrs are well-favoured at the exalted 
threshold of the Almighty, and that the merciful 
glances of &Abdu'l-Baha--may our souls be His 
sacrifice--are at all times directed towards them.  
     On behalf of this bereaved and eager prisoner, 
convey loving greetings and salutations to all the 
handmaids of God there, particularly the remnants 
of the martyrs' families--and give them the joyful 
tidings that the memory of those dear souls, who 
have laid down their lives in the arena of sacrifice, 
 
+P108 
has always been and will continue to be remembered 
at the fellowship meetings and in His holy presence.  
 
     13.  O leaf that has been stirred by the breeze of 
God!  O victim of oppression in the path of the 
&Abha Beauty!--may my soul and the souls of the 
handmaids of God be offered up as a sacrifice for the 
dust of His Holy Shrine.  
     I earnestly hope that you may ever abide in peace 
and security within the shelter of the loving-kindness 
of the One true God, may labour diligently in 
those regions to serve His Cause and to diffuse the 
fragrance of holiness, that you may be confirmed at 
all times through His gracious assistance, and that, 
at the gatherings of the handmaids of God, you may 
shine forth as a bright candle, directing those loved 
ones of the Beauty of the All-Merciful to the path of 
divine guidance, exhorting them to be firm and 
steadfast, to be sanctified and detached so that they 
may, one and all, arise to fulfil that which is deemed 
worthy of these days, and by manifesting a goodly 
character and noble conduct cause that country to 
vie with the blissful Paradise.  
 
     14.  All praise be to the &Abha Beauty, the 
Best-Beloved, the Desire of the world, for having 
enabled His well-assured leaves to remain firm in the 
Cause of God and steadfast in His love, even as 
immovable mountains, particularly the ladies 
 
+P109 
belonging to the household of the &Afnan--the 
twigs of the celestial Tree, who are resident in the 
land of &Ya [Yazd]--upon them be the glory of the 
Most Glorious.  In these days when tempestuous 
winds of tests are blowing and an ocean of trials has 
risen high, they have rid themselves of all earthly 
attachments, set their affection on the sacred beauty 
of the True One and have turned their hearts to the 
celestial kingdom.  
     The contents of your letter were highly appreciated.  
Praise be to God that from the rose-garden of 
its words and inner meanings the fragrance of 
spiritual fellowship was inhaled, and from the 
meadows of its pages the sweet melody of love, of 
remembrance and glorification of God was heard.  It 
filled our hearts with immense joy, for it indicated 
that you were enjoying good health, and so were the 
saplings of the garden of God and the handmaids of 
the Merciful, particularly the remnants of the families 
of those who have offered up their lives in the 
path of the Lord of Mercy.  
 
     15.  At the exalted Threshold of our Lord, the 
Best-Beloved of the world, I fervently beseech Him 
to graciously keep that assured leaf and the other 
handmaids of the Merciful safe and secure under the 
shelter of His bounty and grace.  
     The love-laden letter penned by that dearly-loved 
handmaid of God has reached this yearning prisoner 
and its perusal has filled my heart with joy and 
 
+P110 
happiness, inasmuch as it indicates that you have 
turned in prayer and supplication to the Kingdom of 
God and been attracted to His divine fragrances.  It 
imparted exceeding gladness and radiance, and 
thereby the hearts and spirits were inspired.  Both at 
the sublime meetings convened in His presence and 
at the fellowship gatherings of the handmaids of the 
merciful Lord your name and the names of the 
beloved handmaids in India are often mentioned 
with high praise.  
     Praised be God that after attaining the holy 
Threshold of the Merciful in this hallowed land, this 
luminous Spot, you were able to take back with you 
the gift of the divine fragrance of holiness, to 
perfume the nostrils of the handmaids of God, to 
refresh and stimulate, nay rather revive and quicken 
the lifeless bodies through the potency of His 
wondrous exhortations, His sublime counsels and 
teachings.  To all the handmaids of God announce 
the joyful tidings that both at the blessed and 
luminous Shrine and in the holy presence of Him 
Who is the Mystery of God we continually pray for 
all of you, extol your noble virtues, call to mind the 
memory of the radiant faces of those faithful leaves, 
and from the exalted court of the Lord of Glory 
implore for every one of you unbounded heavenly 
assistance and confirmation.  
 
     16.  On my return from Beyrouth I was sorry to 
find out that you had left for Italy and I missed seeing 
 
+P111 
you before you left.  Not only I but all the holy 
household miss you very much.  Though we miss 
you we are glad to learn that our Lord has directed 
you to go into the world and give the Glad Tidings 
of the Kingdom to the people and awaken the 
sleeping souls.  How happy you must have been that 
you left with this thought in your mind that with the 
direction of our Lord you have gone.  We hope that 
we soon will hear of your wonderful services in the 
Path of the Cause of God.  Have no fear and be not 
down-hearted.  Trust in Him.  Be sure you will be 
successful at the end, for He has sent you and He will 
surely be with you and help you always.  
 
     17.  O my dear sister!  Your excellent letter 
brought me much joy, testifying as it did to your 
ardour and pure intent, and to your being immersed 
in the ocean of God's heavenly love, and also to the  
harmony and concord among His handmaids
--which indeed is the greatest of God's bestowals:  
for fellowship, closeness and love are glories of the 
Kingdom, and richest gifts from the Lord of dominion 
and might.  We thank Him then for this great 
bounty.                                                     
     To the honoured handmaid of God, Miss Barney, 
give my many and fond wishes.  I implore God to 
assist her and yourself to attain the greatest of all His 
favours in His mighty Kingdom.  
     I conveyed the salutations from all of you, and 
your expressions of devoted servitude, to Him 
 
+P112 
Whom God hath purposed, the Centre of His 
ancient Covenant.  
     From this imprisoned handmaid.  
 
     18.  The Festival of &Ridvan is come and the 
splendour of the light of God is shining from the 
invisible horizon of His mercy.  The overflowing 
grace of the Lord of oneness is pouring down 
copiously from the unseen world and the glad-tidings 
of the Kingdom are coming in from all 
countries.  The resplendent morn that betokens the 
advancement of the Cause of God and heralds the 
exaltation of His Word is dawning in every region.  
     Praise be to God that the fame of the Ancient 
Beauty--may my life be offered up for His loved 
ones--has been noised abroad in the world and the 
glory of His Cause is spread far and wide throughout 
the East and the West.  These joyous developments 
will indeed gladden the hearts of His loved 
ones.  
 
     19.  You should not think that the record of 
those meetings can ever be blotted out from the 
pages of history or that the memory of those 
gatherings can fade from the face of the world.  Nay 
every single act, every deed or utterance is a seed 
sown in the garden of life.  Ere long it will grow and 
develop, yielding an abundant harvest even as a 
fruitful tree....  
 
+P113 
     Those sufferings were endured for the sake of 
God alone and for His love.  They occurred during 
this century in which the Manifestation of God has 
appeared, and their underlying purpose was solely 
to glorify the Cause of the &Abha Beloved, and to 
exalt the Word of God.  Indeed, a single deed 
performed in this Day is equivalent to the deeds of a 
thousand years.  
 
     20.  Both in the Persian and Arabic Writings of 
the Primal Point--may the life of all men be offered 
up for Him--there are several, nay indeed numerous 
passages in which He directs His plea to the exalted 
court of Him Whom God shall make manifest, 
requesting Him to graciously protect the leaves of 
the Tree of the &Bayan, that they may not fall away 
but rather attain their paradise which is the recognition 
of His Manifestation.  
     The detailed account you had given about the 
services she+F1 has performed during the early days of 
the Faith is entirely true, and sufficient witness unto 
it is God.  God willing, the services she has rendered 
and the hardships she has endured may yield excellent 
results.  With the utmost humility and devotion 
we will pray for her at the Holy Shrine, beseeching 
divine confirmation and assistance.  Likewise, in the 
sublime presence of Him Whom God has purposed 
we will beg earnestly for His tender solicitude and 
the outpouring of His special favours.  
 
+F1 Elsewhere in this letter reference is made to one of the female 
+F1 relatives of the recipient.  
 
+P114 
     21.  HIS HOLINESS &ABDU'L-BAHA ASCENDED TO 
&ABHA KINGDOM INFORM FRIENDS.  GREATEST HOLY 
LEAF.  
 
     22.  NOW IS A PERIOD OF GREAT TESTS.  THE FRIENDS 
SHOULD BE FIRM AND UNITED IN DEFENDING THE 
CAUSE.  NAKEZEENS+F1 STARTING ACTIVITIES THROUGH 
PRESS AND OTHER CHANNELS ALL OVER THE WORLD.  
SELECT COMMITTEE OF WISE COOL HEADS TO HANDLE 
PRESS PROPAGANDA IN AMERICA.  GREATEST HOLY LEAF.  
 
     23.  MEMORIAL MEETING WORLD OVER JANUARY 
SEVEN.  MASTER LEFT FULL INSTRUCTIONS IN HIS WILL 
AND TESTAMENT.  TRANSLATION WILL BE SENT.  INFORM 
FRIENDS.  GREATEST HOLY LEAF.  
 
     24.  IN WILL SHOGHI EFFENDI APPOINTED GUARDIAN 
OF CAUSE AND HEAD OF HOUSE OF JUSTICE.  
INFORM AMERICAN FRIENDS.  GREATEST HOLY LEAF.  
 
     25.  The hearts of the people of &Baha are 
intensely burning by reason of the great calamity, 
and their longing cries are rising up to the Concourse 
on High and the angelic dwellers in the 
&Abha Paradise, yet, this day is the day of service, 
and this time the time to spread the holy Teachings 
 
+F1 Covenant-breakers.  
 
+P115 
far and wide; therefore must God's loved ones like 
unto a shining flame, rise up to serve the Cause of 
God with all their might and vie with one another in 
service.  Let them, even as shooting stars, drive the 
disloyal out--so that in the Preserved Tablet of God, 
they may be recorded with that company who ever 
stood faithful to His Covenant and Testament.  
     Shoghi Effendi, the Guardian of the Cause of 
God, the Chosen Branch and leader of the people of 
&Baha, as a result of intense and unceasing grief over 
this great bereavement, this supreme affliction, has 
determined to absent himself for a short period, in 
an effort to rest, and to regain his health, after which 
he will return to the Holy Land and resume his 
services and obligations to the Cause of God.  
During his absence, in accordance with his letter 
herewith enclosed,+F1 this prisoner is appointed to 
administer the affairs of the Faith, in consultation 
with the members of the Holy Household.  
     For this reason I have temporarily made arrangements 
so that the persons named by Shoghi Effendi 
may meet and the affairs be conducted in consultation 
with them.  It is my hope that during the period 
of his absence the beloved of the Lord and the 
handmaids of the Merciful will exert their efforts to 
advance the Cause and accelerate its growth.  He is, 
verily, compassionate and merciful to His servants.  
 
     26.  We thank you most sincerely for your kind 
letters of sympathy, and we appreciate your loving 
 
+F1 See III, 1, page 21.  
 
+P116 
Messages, which are as comforting balm to our 
wounded hearts.  
     It would be our wish to answer each letter 
individually, but the shock of our bereavement 
was so sudden, and the work to which we were 
compelled to attend, was so overwhelming, that 
time failed us.  Now, we wish you to realize that 
your words of steadfast faith and love were our 
greatest solace throughout the days of our grief, 
for we felt that you would each and all faithfully 
and loyally strive to carry on the work for which 
the life of our Beloved Master was spent.  
     We are more than thankful to God that He has 
not left us without a leader, but that Shoghi 
Effendi is appointed to guide the administration of 
the Cause.  
     We hope that the friends of God, the beloved 
and the handmaidens of the Merciful, will pray for 
us, that we may be enabled to help Shoghi Effendi 
in every way in our power to accomplish the Mission 
entrusted to him.  
 
     27.  REJOICED OVER CONVENTION NEWS.  PRAYING 
FOR CONFIRMATION.  HOLY LEAF.  
 
     28.  In this day, those holy souls are divinely 
confirmed who stand firm in the most sacred Cause 
of the &Abha Beauty, those who are steadfast, and 
loyal to the Covenant and Testament of &Abdu'l-Baha.  
 
+P117 
     Praised be the undying glory of God that you and 
all His friends have attained this greatest of gifts.  
You stand fast-rooted in the divine Covenant, and 
you turn to the appointed Centre, the explicitly 
chosen Branch.  In all the world, what conceivable 
bounty could ever be greater than this?  
 
     29.  It is not unknown to those who stand firm 
in the Covenant and Testament of God that the 
centre of violation and his associates, from the day of 
the ascension of the Ancient Beauty, may His Great 
Name be ever exalted, have been working night and 
day and continually putting forth all their efforts, to 
spread disorder and disrupt the Faith.  At this time, 
because of our terrible affliction, the ascension of 
&Abdu'l-Baha--may the quintessence of our souls 
be sacrificed to His sacred resting-place--they are 
busying themselves more than ever with the circulation 
of false rumours and idle imaginings, their  
purpose being, one way or another, to instil doubts 
into the minds, and thus to achieve their vain and 
futile ends.  
     Alas for them, however, there is no doubt at all 
that they will achieve nothing but the failure of their 
plans and the frustration of their hopes.  Utter 
disappointment and a bitter end is all they will ever 
gain--just as &Abdu'l-Baha--may our lives be sacrificed 
for His meekness--has foretold in His Will 
and Testament, where He clearly and unequivocally 
sets forth the dissidence, the mischief-making and 
 
+P118 
the wicked designs of that abominable band.  And it 
is certain that through the never-ceasing confirmations 
of God, the light diffused by the loyalty of the 
true believers will scatter the darkness of the suspicions 
which the malicious have been spreading, and 
the brightness that streams from the believers' faces 
will dispel the gloom of the people of doubt.  
     Briefly, for some time they had been applying to 
the various government agencies, in the hope that 
with the government's assistance they would be able 
to obtain legal support for their empty claims.  
However, God be praised, they were disappointed.  
Then came a day, Tuesday, January 30--that is, 
four months ago--when the disaffected gathered 
together at the Mansion of &Bahji, invited in some of 
the rabble of &Akka, and after joint consultation, 
determined to go to the Holy Tomb, forcibly wrest 
its key from the caretakers, and hand it over to the 
arch Covenant-breaker, pivot of the violation.  Such 
was the plan, the disgraceful action, devised by the 
prime mover of mischief and his lieutenant.  
     They then committed the brazen act.  From the 
caretaker of the Holy Tomb, &Aqa Siyyid &Abu'l-Qasim, 
they took away the key by force, and 
he, unable to withstand their attack, at once 
dispatched his assistant, &Aqa &Khalil, to Haifa, to 
report to Shoghi Effendi what had taken place.  The 
news reached Haifa about two hours after sunset, 
and the matter was instantly referred to the Governor.  
On his stringent orders, the key was surrendered 
that very night and placed in Government 
 
+P119 
custody until the matter could be fully investigated 
to determine the question of rightful ownership.  
     Now, after the passage of four months, the 
Government has rendered its verdict, to the effect 
that the question should be put to the &Baha'i 
community, and that whatever decision the 
&Baha'is arrive at will be conclusive.  If the &Baha'i 
community considers &Mirza &Muhammad-'Ali to 
be excommunicated, then he has no rights whatever 
to the takeover.  Therefore, wherever &Baha'is 
reside, they must, through the given city's Spiritual 
Assembly, and bearing the signature of named 
individuals who are members of the elected body, 
inform the British authorities in Jerusalem, either by 
cable or letter sent through His Majesty's ambassadors 
or consuls, that the &Baha'i community, in 
conformity with the explicit writings and the Will 
and Testament of His Eminence &Abdu'l-Baha, Sir                     
&Abbas Effendi, texts well known and available in 
His own hand--recognize His Eminence Shoghi 
Effendi as the one to whom all &Baha'is must turn, 
and as the Guardian of the Cause of God, and that 
they have no connection whatever, either material 
or spiritual, with &Mirza &Muhammad-Ali, whom 
they consider to be excommunicated from the 
&Baha'i Faith, according to the explicit writings of 
&Abdu'l-Baha.  
     It should be the request, therefore, of &Baha'is of 
all countries, both men and women, in every 
important centre, wherever they may reside 
throughout the world, that the officials of His 
 
+P120 
Britannic Majesty's Government in Palestine, its 
Headquarters being Jerusalem, issue a categorical 
order that the key of the Holy Tomb--which is the 
Point of Adoration and the sanctuary of all &Baha'is 
in the world--be restored to His Eminence Shoghi 
Effendi, the Chosen Branch, and in this way to 
render the &Baha'i community, whether of the East 
or of the West, more appreciative than ever of 
British justice.  The text of both cable and letter, 
together with the address, have been written on a 
separate sheet, as enclosed.  The message is to be 
signed by the representatives and known followers 
of the &Baha'i Faith in that city.  
 
     30.  This dire calamity, this great affliction, the 
passing of &Abdu'l-Baha, may our lives be sacrificed 
for His meekness, has shaken us to the very 
depths.  Our lives lie in ruins.  In our hearts, the stars 
of happiness have set, the lamps of joy have been put 
out.  No more, from the rose-garden of the All-Glorious, 
does the nightingale warble those songs 
that fed the spirit in days gone by.  From over the 
flower-beds of Heaven, the dove trills and coos no 
more.  Now is the bright morning dark, and blazing 
noon is night, and the sea of woe has surged, and a 
storm of sorrow has overwhelmed mankind.  
     Alas, alas, that luminous Moon, with His ravaged 
breast a thicket of arrows--darts of the evil-doers' 
taunts, their derision, their calumnies--and His 
heart grieved by the malevolence of His foes and the 
 
+P121 
rebellion of the violators, is now hidden behind 
heavy clouds, has departed from this world's horizons, 
and has risen upward to the realm of transcendent 
glory, to the all-highest Horizon.  
     And now, at such a time as this, a time of our 
affliction and deep distress, the prime mover of 
mischief, the centre of sedition, thinking to profit by 
this eclipse of the Sun of the Covenant, the Moon of 
spiritual concord, has taken advantage of what he 
sees as a rare opportunity for himself, and has 
mounted a violent revolt, and with the support of 
their second chief, has begun to spread the most 
far-fetched of malicious accusations, and is busy day 
and night, stirring up trouble and carrying out plots 
and stratagems the details of which would take too 
long to enumerate here and which you will be 
informed of later on.  
     Although they behold in every instance only 
grievous abasement and disappointment, failures 
and defeats, still their burning jealousy blazes up 
within them all the more, and their haughtiness and 
arrogance only increase.  At this hour of turmoil and 
deep anguish and sudden, unexpected calamity, our 
only consolation lies in service to the Cause of God, 
and steadfastness in His Faith, and the guarding of 
His Law, and in the bonds of unity among the 
friends, and their fervour and joy, and in deeds that 
exemplify the holy Teachings of the &Abha Beauty, 
may His name be exalted, and the counsels of 
&Abdu'l-Baha, may our souls be sacrificed for His 
servitude.  It is our hope that we all shall be helped to 
 
+P122 
achieve these things, which alone befit this sacred 
day.  
     It appears from your letter that you had written 
prior to the receipt of the Will and Testament of the 
Centre of the Covenant.  You have certainly perused 
it by now.  This Text is His decisive decree; it 
constitutes the very life of those endued with 
understanding.  In it the Pen of Bounty has set forth 
in the most powerful, comprehensive, clear and 
detailed manner the obligations devolving on every 
stratum of the &Baha'i community, and has hacked 
out the tree of violation by its root, and has caused 
the centre of it to be forlorn and disgraced.  He has 
specifically named the centre to whom all must turn, 
thus solidly fixing and establishing the foundations of 
the Covenant, and has clearly appointed the centre, to 
whom all the people of &Baha must direct themselves, 
the Chosen Branch, the Guardian of the Cause 
of God.  This great bestowal is one of the special 
characteristics of this supreme Revelation, which of 
all Dispensations is the noblest and most excellent.  
Goodly be this to the steadfast, glad-tidings to the 
staunch, blessings to those who win the day.  
     Praise be to God, you have arisen to serve Him, and 
are actively teaching and spreading His Faith.  Such a 
bounty merits thanks a thousand times over, and 
praises forever, in the hallowed sanctuary of the one 
Beloved.  
     Convey my &Baha'i salutations to all the faithful.  
 
+P123 
     31.  Although that supreme calamity, that 
great ordeal, the ascension of &Abdu'l-Baha, put the 
torch to the harvest of our hearts, and brought down 
both our outer and inner beings, wedding us to grief 
and ceaseless pain, yet praised be God, He Who is 
the Dayspring of the Covenant has appointed in 
writing a specific centre, and designated the 
Guardian of the Cause, Shoghi Effendi, as the one 
toward whom must turn all those who follow 
&Baha'u'llah--His purpose being that the Faith of 
God and His Cause should remain secure and safe.  
For this greatest of gifts it is fitting that we should 
return a thousand thanks to the one Beloved, and 
offer a thousand praises to His court of holiness.  
     Likewise, the hand of divine grace has reared 
blessed souls who are shining today like lamps of 
guidance in the assemblage of the Company on 
High, and who like luminous stars are casting their 
bright rays across the skies of faithfulness.  How 
often we heard the Master, the Centre of the 
Covenant, say:  `At the time when Christ rose out of 
this mortal world and ascended into the Eternal 
Kingdom, He had twelve disciples, and even of 
these, one was cast off.  But because that handful of 
souls stood up, and with selflessness, devotion and 
detachment, resolved to spread His holy Teachings 
and to scatter abroad the sweet fragrances of God, 
disregarding the world and all its peoples, and 
because they utterly lost themselves in Christ--they 
succeeded, by the power of the spirit, in capturing 
the cities of men's hearts, so that the splendour of the 
 
+P124 
one true God pervaded all the earth, and put the 
darkness of ignorance to flight.  
     `Now when I shall depart from this world, I shall 
leave more than fifty thousand blessed individuals, 
every one of whom is staunch and firm as the high 
mountains, shining out over the earth like sparkling 
stars.  These are the quintessence of loyalty and 
fellowship and love.  They are the self-sacrificing 
watchers over the Cause, and they are the guides to 
all who seek after truth.  Judge from this what the 
future will be!'  
     It is certain that when we act in accordance with 
the Teachings of the &Abha Beauty and the counsels 
of &Abdu'l-Baha, then will this world become the 
&Abha Paradise, and its thorns and brambles of 
cruelty will change into a blossoming garden of the 
faithful.  
     May we all be enabled to achieve this end.  
 
     32.  O faithful servant of the Best-Beloved, the 
Most Glorious!  O steadfast friend, flourishing in the 
garden of His luminous Beauty!  The brief but 
informative letter you had written to Shoghi 
Effendi, the Chosen Branch, the Guardian of the 
Cause of God, has been received together with the 
scrolls of doubt you had enclosed.  Indeed, men 
whose nostrils have been perfumed by the fragrance 
of the &Abha Paradise, whose ears have been 
exhilarated by the sweet melodies of the nightingale 
warbling in the rose-garden of immortality, and 
 
+P125 
whose souls have been refreshed and quickened by 
the reviving breaths of holiness, would surely be 
saddened to hear the screech of the raven and the 
croaking of the crow, and from them they would 
certainly endeavour to flee.  For the disgusting odour 
of violation is like poisonous air, whose baneful 
effects upon the body and soul are injurious and 
harmful, nay rather it will eventually lead to terrible 
loss and perdition.  Thus the way you have dealt 
with this matter is approved and acceptable.  
     Since Shoghi Effendi has gone on a journey for a 
while, this lowly one was prompted to answer your  
letter.  Convey wondrous &Abha greetings to all the 
lovers of the Blessed Beauty and the faithful friends 
of &Abdu'l-Baha.  And upon you be His glory.  
 
     33.  O God, my God!  
     Thou seest me immersed in the depths of grief, 
drowned in my sorrow, my heart on fire with the 
agony of parting, my inmost self aflame with 
longing.  Thou seest my tears streaming down, 
hearest my sighs rising up like smoke, my never-ceasing 
groans, my cries, my shouts that will not be 
stilled, the useless wailing of my heart.  
     For the sun of joy has set, has sunk below the 
horizon of this world, and in the hearts of the 
righteous the lights of courage and consolation have 
gone out.  So grave this catastrophe, so dire this 
disaster, that the inner being crumbles away to dust, 
 
+P126 
and the heart blazes up, and nothing remains save 
only despair and anguish.  
     Thou seest, O my God, in the midmost of this 
terrible event, this ultimate calamity, when the 
devoted never put aside their mourning dress, and 
the moaning and the tears never cease--how that 
malevolent band have, with all their powers, 
mounted an attack against Thy loved ones who are 
loyal to the Covenant, even as the assault of wolves 
upon the flock.  They are striving, with all their 
strength, to bring down the mighty structure of Thy 
Covenant in ruins, and level Thy strong citadel to 
the ground, and turn away from Thy straight and 
clearly-marked path those Thou hast guided aright.  
O my Lord, I voice my complaint before Thee, and 
lay bare my griefs and sorrows, and supplicate at the 
door of Thy oneness, and whisper unto Thee, and 
weep and cry out.  
     O my kind Lord!  Thou didst make a clear 
compact and a Covenant explicit and firm, not in 
veiled and allusive language, that all should turn 
unto the Centre of Thy Covenant and the Protector 
of Thy Cause--so that no doubts whatever would 
remain for the hostile and the suspicious to exploit; 
and then Thy lone Servant rose up to lift Thy banner 
high, and carry the day for Thy Faith.  For thirty 
years He summoned the people unto Thee, publicly, 
privately, and spread Thy Teachings and Thy 
principles to every corner, every country of the 
earth.  Night and day, He fostered Thy loved ones in 
the cradle of divine knowledge and wisdom, and 
 
+P127 
endowed them with the qualities of the spirit.  And 
all this time He bore, at the hands of that evil crew, 
not once but over and over again, every kind of 
outrage, and calumny, and oppression.  For they 
were forever lying in wait for Him, were spying on 
Him at all times from their ambush, attacking Him 
in whatever manner they chose, swelling with their 
insolence and pride.  And yet, through Thy strong 
support, Thine overwhelming confirmations, they 
were the losers in the end, and their strivings came to 
nothing in this world's life, and all they gained was 
their own ruin.  
     Then, O my Lord, Thou didst make Him to 
ascend unto Thee, to place Him at Thy side, and by 
this the pillars of joy were shaken to their base, and 
the hearts of the devoted were terrified, and the 
smoke of their sorrow overspread the earth.  At such 
a time that hate-filled band, seeing their advantage in 
the dire event, came in from every highway and 
byway, advancing on every side to topple over the 
throne of Thy Covenant, and lead Thy loved ones to 
perdition.  They have laid their very being in ruins 
and they know not.  How far, how very far have 
they gone in their ignorance!  
     But the Centre of Thy complete and flawless 
Covenant, He Who occupies the seat of servitude to 
Thee in Thine exalted and all-glorious Cause, had 
written by Thy will and Thy power a Book that 
shall never be lost nor ever forgotten.  Within it by 
Thy predestinating knowledge and might, He had 
set forth all that is essential and obligatory for the 
 
+P128 
upraising of Thy Cause in this world below.  It is a 
book in which all things are explained in minute 
detail, in such wise that no matters whether small 
or great have been left out.  And by Thy will and 
pleasure He designated therein, in place of His own 
Person, a Branch grown out from the Tree of Thy 
holiness, one fresh and tender, verdant and 
flourishing, arising to serve Thee, dwelling in the 
groves of Thine eternity, and Thine immortal 
gardens.  And he, after turning to Thy gracious 
countenance and through Thine ancient succour, is 
inviting the people unto Thee and unto Thy Covenant, 
sound and firmly-established, and is spreading 
Thy commandments and Thy doctrines throughout 
Thy land, and guiding Thy servants to the path that 
leads aright.  
     O my God, I beg of Thee by all the days which 
Thy Light, the Centre of Thy Covenant, did spend 
in scattering Thy sweet scents abroad, and by all the 
nights when that delicate and fragile Being rested 
not, but kept the long vigils, crying out unto Thee, 
expending His efforts to guard Thy Cause and Thy 
dear ones, exerting His utmost to spread out Thy 
bounties and bestowals--while the malevolent, 
comfortable against their pillows, rested in their 
beds--I entreat Thee, by the ordeals He endured, for 
the sake of exalting Thy Word, at the hands of those 
who join partners to God, and the deniers, and the 
deserters, to keep Thy loved ones safe from the 
arrows of the calumniators, and the doubts of those 
who mislead and betray.  Hold them fast, then, in the 
 
+P129 
gardens and groves of Thy Covenant and Testament, 
and make them to enter the pavilions of Thy 
good pleasure, and shelter them in the refuge of Thy 
protection, and cast upon them the glance of Thy 
mercy's eye, and guard them from deviation and 
schism.  Make them to live in unity and harmony, 
one with the others, and aid them to serve Thy Faith 
and to spread Thy Teachings far and wide.  
     Verily Thou art the Living, the Eternal, the 
Watchful, the All-Powerful, the All-Knowing, the 
All-Wise.  
     O you true servants of the Holy Threshold, you 
faithful friends of &Abdu'l-Baha!  
     Our hearts are burning away with the intense 
emotions aroused by this most dreaded of calamities,  
and our souls are suffering the torments of this 
separation causing delay in correspondence with 
you, yet God be praised, you are all among the 
well-favoured at the divine Threshold, and are 
drinking from the winecup of the Eternal Covenant.  
To the holy summons, you have all replied `Yea!'; 
you have seized the chalice of His Testament and 
held it high.  You are enamoured of that world-adorning 
Face, your hearts are tightly bound to 
those curling locks, that waft the fragrance of the 
musk-deer's scent; you are held spellbound by that 
magic nature, and by the teachings like nectar on the 
tongue, refreshing the spirit; and all continually 
receiving divine bounties from the One alone 
beloved, and ministering at His Threshold, and 
sincere and pure of heart.  
 
+P130 
     The glories of that Sun are shining now from out 
the high, immortal realms, and His glance is resting 
on His loved ones.  The portals of everlasting 
blessings are opened wide.  The succouring armies 
are standing ready, waiting to behold what efforts 
the loved ones will exert as they carry out the holy 
Will, as they boil up and roar like waves of the sea.  
Let them rest not for a moment, nor wish for quiet 
and repose; let them carry out all His behests and 
thus prove their loyal gratitude for all His endless 
grace.  
     Over a span of thirty years the Centre of God's 
Covenant rested not, nor was His human temple 
ever tranquil and at peace.  By day, by night, He 
would be teaching and guiding stranger and friend 
alike, and protecting the Cause, and seeing to its 
progress, and for these things He sacrificed His life.  
Now does loyalty to Him require that the beloved 
should rise up in obedience to His instructions, and 
devote their efforts to teaching the Faith, and to 
passing around from one to the next this winecup 
tempered at the camphor fountain,+F1 and to protecting 
God's Cause from the evil suggestions and 
the mischief of the adversary, and to guarding the 
structure of the holy Covenant from disruption at 
the hands of the Covenant-breakers.  Now is the 
time to stand as an impregnable rampart around the 
city of the Cause of God, to defend it from the 
 
+F1 The word camphor derives from Arabic &kafur, as in &Qur'an 
+F1 76:5.  Camphor has been used as a refreshing tonic in Eastern 
+F1 medicine.  
 
+P131 
assaults of alienation and violation, that come 
against it like Gog and Magog.+F1 
     Praised be God, those of His friends who have 
been cradled and fostered for many a year within His 
wisdom and His teachings, and have drunk deep 
from the soft-flowing waters of true and mystic 
knowledge, and whose eyes have been opened, 
whose ears are attentive, whose hearts are wise
--these, in all that concerns faith and certitude and 
the abiding by His instructions, stand fixed and firm 
as the high mountains.  They are even as the 
towering palm, the goodly tree `its root firmly 
fixed, and its branches in the heavens.'+F2  Their roots 
run deep, and the fruits they yield are sweet.  They 
know a mirage for what it is; they know, too, what 
will endure--for `As to the foam, it is quickly gone:  
and as to what is useful to man, it remaineth on the 
earth.'+F3  They have heard and read of how the 
Covenant met with opposition and violation in the 
Dispensations of the past, and have both heard of 
and seen for themselves the storms of mischief and 
the tests that appeared in the early days of this Cause.  
They know how these trials are designed to sift and 
purify, and how the dense clouds of revolt and 
violation would gradually pass from its skies; for the 
errors and falsehoods of the violators can never 
 
+F1 cf. &Qur'an 18:93:  `Verily, Gog and Magog waste this land 
+F1 ...'  The rampart here described was of iron and molten brass, 
+F1 so that Gog and Magog could neither scale it nor dig under it.  
+F2 &Qur'an 14:29.  
+F3 &Qur'an 13:18.  
 
+P132 
withstand the overwhelming power of the Covenant, 
nor can the mountains of diabolical suggestions 
ever stand under the rod of God's majesty and 
might.  
     O faithful loved ones of &Abdu'l-Baha!  The 
centre of sedition, the focus of rebellion--whose evil 
character and passions, even in the days of the 
Ancient Beauty, made him known for his stubborn 
perversity and his ambition to lead--began to put 
forward certain claims, gathered about him a pitiful 
band, raised up the ensign of self-glorification and 
self-love, and considered himself to be a partner in 
authority with none other than Him Who was the 
True One, until in the end the hand of the Lord's 
omnipotence struck down his plans and hopes.  
     For a period of thirty years, he opposed the Centre 
of the Covenant and, to bring down His structure in 
ruins, did everything that lay in his power.  This in 
spite of the fact that the divine Beauty had made His 
Covenant so strong, and appointed its Centre so 
explicitly, in writing, unmistakably, that He had left 
no room for any questions or doubts.  In the Most 
Holy Book of Aqdas, which in this most excellent of 
all ages is the Mother Book, and embraces all, and 
again in the &Kitab-i-Ahdi,+F1 the last revealed 
Tablet by the Tongue of knowledge and wisdom, 
which contains the final wishes of God--the people 
of &Baha are directed with perfect clarity to turn 
their faces toward Him Whom God has purposed, 
and He is designated as the Interpreter of the Book, 
 
+F1 The Book of My Covenant.  
 
+P133 
the Resolver of all complex and difficult questions, 
and the Centre of the Faith.  Therein as well are the 
other Branches, the &Afnan and the rest of the 
believers bidden to direct themselves unto that One 
so that all might face one and the same Centre, and 
all be bound thereto.  Thus would the basic foundation 
of God's Cause, which is unity, remain 
unassailable.  Thus the root of heresy and rebellion 
would wither away, and just as in the days when He 
Who is the Truth was made manifest, so too in the 
day of His Covenant the light of unity would 
pervade all things, and put to flight the murk of 
disbelief and dualism and rebellion and opposition
--and thus the tree of His holy Cause would grow 
and flourish, and the rich fruits borne by the holy 
Teachings would satisfy all needs and be sweet in the 
mouth of all mankind.  
     This fact of there being only one Centre and of 
turning unto a single holy Being is, in the Kingdom 
of His Cause, as the shaft or spindle of a millstone, 
and all the other laws and ordinances must needs 
revolve around this one.  In the temple of God's 
religion the Centre of the Cause can be likened to the 
heart, for upon it depends the life of the human body 
as one entity, as well as the relationships of its organs 
and their essential growth and vitality.  In human 
society the Centre of the Cause can be compared to 
the sun, whose magnetic force controls the movements  
and orbits of the planets.  The Centre of the 
Cause is also like the spine of a book, for by it the 
pages are all banded together into one book, and 
 
+P134 
without the spine the papers would become loose 
and scattered.  
     Now each separate member of the community 
who is within the shelter of that blessed unity is, 
according to his rank and station, the recipient of 
grace; and that rank is respected and protected, in 
conformity with the verse:  `Not one of us but hath 
his clearly designated station.'+F1  Thus, in the body of 
man, the eye has a preordained station, one not 
belonging to some lesser members; and yet, should 
it once depart from the whole, and its connection 
with the centre be broken, then its membership in 
the body, and its very life, are ended, let alone its 
previous station and degree.  Or should the eye be 
plucked from its place, torn out of the body, it 
would be deprived of life itself, how much less 
would it continue to enjoy the station that rightly 
belongs to the eye.  
     How strange!  With reference to one who smokes 
opium, the Ancient Beauty, the Most Great Name, 
has said:  `He is not of Me', making no distinction 
here between one enjoying God's special favour, and 
some other.  If the smoking of opium, which is one 
of the secondary and lesser prohibitions, completely 
severs the smoker from membership in the community 
and from relationship to the Person of the 
Manifestation, then what must be the condition of 
him who refuses to acknowledge the Centre of the 
holy Covenant?  In the words of Christ, `If thine eye 
 
+F1 &Qur'an 37:164.  
 
+P135 
cause thee to stumble, pluck it out ... if thy hand 
offend thee, cut it off...'+F1 
     O would that they had contented themselves 
with their refusal to recognize that shining Being
--with their failure to obey Him and to be lowly 
before Him.  But no, they beat upon rebellion's 
drum, and hoisted the flag of contumacy and 
spite, and blew the trumpet of calumnies across 
the world.  In the hearts of the credulous they 
sowed seeds of disaffection, and inconstancy and 
opposition.  They made common cause with the 
hostile, the biased, the mockers, who were 
arrayed against the Faith of the Blessed Beauty, 
flattering them and paying them bribes and holding 
out promises and hopes; they worked hand in 
glove with those occupying the seats of the judiciary, 
and those authorized to interpret the law and 
pronounce judgment, and those who sat on 
despots' thrones, and with still others who were 
engaged in affairs remote from God's; and by all 
manner of deceits and stratagems incited them to 
utterly extirpate the Covenant of Almighty God 
and the Centre of it.  They even, with a liberal 
distribution of funds, hired assassins to shed the 
sacred blood of that Vicegerent of the Glorious 
Lord.  
     Could any just person imagine that such as these 
have any relationship or spiritual connection 
whatever with the Beauty of the One true God, or 
that they could be accounted as members of the 
 
+F1 cf.Matthew 18:8-9; Mark 9:43-7.  
 
+P136 
&Baha'i community?  Would not such as these be 
only plucked-out eyes and palsied hands?  
     Look at the treatise that their second chief wrote, 
regarding their first chief and his associates--in 
which he described, with his own pen, in minute 
detail, their shameful purposes and actions relative 
to the Centre of the divine Covenant--aims and acts 
that no perverse and godless tyrant would consider 
permissible treatment for anyone.  Their second 
chief tells how, to a despotic and oppressive government, 
they brought false and malicious accusations 
against &Abdu'l-Baha; how they undertook to 
uproot the holy Tree; how they forged Tablets, in 
&Baha'u'llah's name, that denounced the Centre of 
His Covenant; how they altered and corrupted the 
holy Texts to such a degree that he said his 
confidence in the reliability of the holy Tablets was 
virtually shattered.+F1  These and their other shameless 
activities are all set forth; and strangest of all is this, 
 
+F1 On p. 14 of `An Epistle to the Bahai World' written by 
+F1 &Mirza &Badi'u'llah, translated by Dr &Aminu'llah 
+F1 &Farid, and published by the &Baha'i Publishing Society in 
+F1 Chicago in 1907, there is the following passage concerning 
+F1 the falsification by &Muhammad-'Ali of a Tablet in which       
+F1 &Baha'u'llah relates the misdeeds of &Mirza &Yahya, to 
+F1 whom He refers as `My brother'.  &Mirza &Badi'u'llah 
+F1 writes:  `A few moments passed and I saw him [&Muhammad-'Ali] 
+F1 take up the Tablet, erase "My brother" and replace it 
+F1 with "My Greatest Branch".  Having seen this, I immediately 
+F1 said:  "This deed is a great sin and a breach of trust.  If you 
+F1 show this Tablet, this servant will divulge the whole account, 
+F1 will point out the interpolation, and this will cause all the 
+F1 writings in your possession to be considered unreliable.  
+F1 Hereafter whatsoever of the writings traced by the Supreme 
+F1 Pen you may show me, I will not accept as authentic until I 
+F1 have carefully compared the manuscript with the original 
+F1 handwriting which is elsewhere preserved and have examined 
+F1 the same with a magnifying glass."'  
 
+P137 
that he, their second chief--the very one who wrote 
the confession so full of the abominable acts of their 
first chief and his associates--now cleaves to the first 
one like flesh to bone.  
     They are setting the axe to the root of the Cause of 
God; nor are they in the least ashamed, nor put to the 
blush, before the Lord God and His watchful and 
perceptive servants.  There even exists a paper in the 
hand of &Shu'a', son of their first chief, in which he 
tells of a person who was commissioned and was 
ready and waiting to martyr the Centre of the 
Covenant.  
 
          If I my tale could tell, 
          No bounds my pen would know; 
          My work would swell, 
          My book will grow, 
          For tons of scroll 
          Would bear my woe.  
 
     For over a period of thirty years, always increasing 
their efforts, they inflicted extreme anguish on 
&Abdu'l-Baha; and they did not, in all this span, 
ever take one step nor draw a single breath to help 
the Faith.  They spent their entire time in attempts to 
wean to beloved of God away from obedience to 
the Centre of the Covenant, and to undermine their 
 
+P138 
convictions, making them waver in their faith, and 
turning them cold; and because of what they did, 
thousands of souls were veiled from the holy Cause, 
and prevented from embracing it.  
     Such then is a glimpse of their aims and actions, 
which made them to be cut off from the Holy Tree, 
and excluded them from glory and joy everlasting.  
They lost out, both here and hereafter, and `this 
verily is utter perdition'.+F1 
     O you men who stand fast and firm, you women 
who are steadfast and firm in you faith!  Whensoever 
I visit the Holy Shrines, I think of you, and in 
all lowliness at His Threshold, I entreat the 
Almighty to send down upon you all His invisible 
confirmations, and to let His endless bounties 
enwrap each one of you--so that through the efforts 
of those chosen ones of God, the lights of loyalty and 
sincerity and truth, and staunchness in the divine 
Covenant, will be shed upon that town;+F2 that it may 
be delivered from the consequences of ill-omened 
disaffection and violation, and that instead, a fortunate 
star may rise there out of the concealing depths 
and mount upward to the heavens; that no scrolls of 
doubt, and of calumnies against the divine Covenant, 
may remain therein; and that every name there 
may be written down in the heavenly register of 
those who have kept the faith.  
     O Lord, set their feet firm in Thy Covenant; let 
them hold fast to the cord of steadfastness in Thy 
 
+F1 &Qur'an 22:11.  
+F2 &Khusif.  
 
+P139 
Cause.  Protect them from the hosts of discord and 
calumny, and cause them to come under the sheltering 
banner of Thy Testament, that is raised high on 
the summits of the earth.  
     Light up then in their hearts the flame of severance 
from everything except Thy love, and help them by 
Thine overwhelming might to labour for Thy 
Teachings.  
     Verily Thou art the Generous.  Verily Thou art He 
Whose bounty embraceth all things.  
     May the lights and the splendours be shed upon all 
of you.  
 
     34.  To the doves of faithfulness, ever since 
that most grievous of disasters, the passing of 
&Abdu'l-Baha, this world of dust has become a 
cage, and a place of torment; and to the unrestrained 
nightingales it is only a prison, narrow and dark.  
     Certainly, a pure soul will not bind his heart to 
this passing show, and the gems of spiritual love will 
yearn only to be let go, out of this world.  Nevertheless, 
the all-compelling will of God and His all-encompassing 
and irresistible purpose has desired 
that this dark earth should become as the &Abha 
Kingdom, and this heap of dust be changed until it 
becomes the envy of the rose gardens of Heaven.  
     This is why the Manifestations of God, the 
Day-springs of that all-glorious Sun, have willingly 
accepted to bear, and take upon Their own sacred 
and immaculate Selves, every trial and tribulation 
 
+P140 
and calamity and hurt.  And They have established 
laws and ordinances, that assure the flourishing and 
freedom and joy and salvation of all the human race.  
In this way that primal purpose will be revealed, and 
that subtle mystery divulged.  
     Thus too, have They trained certain souls, and 
reared them with the hands of loving-kindness, that 
these should arise to perform the noble and exalted 
task, and should devote their efforts toward carrying 
out this duty, watering the Tree of life and 
serving all mankind.  
     Praise be to God, you are confirmed and 
flourishing in the Faith, and partaking of your 
portion from that heavenly table, and are receiving 
your benefits in both worlds.  
 
     35.  The passing of &Abdu'l-Baha, may our lives 
be a sacrifice for His meekness, was the ultimate 
calamity, the most great disaster.  The light has fled 
our hearts, and our souls are wedded to sorrow, and 
no power in all the world can furnish any consolation, 
save only the power that comes from the 
steadfastness of the believers and their deep-rooted 
faith, and their unity, and their love for one another.  
     Only these can lessen the pain and quiet the 
anguish.  
     Although to outward seeming the Sun of the 
Covenant has hidden Himself behind the clouds, 
and the Orb of the Testament is concealed, and on 
the holy horizon of glory, He has now set, and is lost 
 
+P141 
to view--still His rays are shining from out His 
hidden place, and forever will His light shed down 
its splendours.  
     For ever and ever will He, with all that invisible 
grace, and those bestowals of the spirit, lead the 
seeker onward, and guide the yearning, and ravish 
the hearts of the lovers.  
     The Will and Testament of &Abdu'l-Baha is His 
decisive decree; it gathers the believers together; it 
preserves their unity; it ensures the protection of the 
Faith of God.  It designates a specific Centre, irrefutably 
and in writing establishing Shoghi Effendi as 
Guardian of the Faith and Chosen Branch, so that his 
name is recorded in the Preserved Tablet, by the 
fingers of grace and bounty.  How grateful should 
we be that such a bounty was bestowed, and such a 
favour granted.  
     Now is the time to arise to serve the Faith with all 
our might, that our loyalty may be clearly proven, 
and that we may perfectly, to the fullest extent and 
in minutest detail, carry out the requirements of 
self-sacrifice.  It is my hope that one and all, we shall 
succeed in this.  
 
     36.  The ascension of Him Who was the Temple 
of the Covenant, the setting of Him Who was the 
Orb of harmony, &Abdu'l-Baha, may our lives be 
sacrificed for the wrongs He suffered, was the most 
dire calamity, and the most dread of ordeals.  It 
dissolved our very hearts, it laid low the very pillars 
 
+P142 
of our being.  It made our eyes to shed tears of blood, 
and our sighs and the sound of our weeping reached 
upward to the Concourse on High.  Then did a sea of 
anguish roll up great waves of grief, and a whirlwind 
of sorrow swept over the peoples of the earth.  
     That blessed soul, following the ascension of the 
sacred &Abha Beauty, may our lives be sacrificed for 
the dust of His sacred threshold, and until the hour 
when His own luminous spirit rose up to the realms 
on high, for a period of thirty years had neither a 
peaceful day nor a night of quiet rest.  Singly and 
alone, He set about to reform the world, and to 
educate and refine its peoples.  He invited all manner 
of beings to enter the Kingdom of God; He watered 
the Tree of the Faith; He guarded the celestial 
Lote-Tree from the tempest; He defeated the foes of 
the Faith, and He frustrated the hopes of the 
malevolent; and always vigilant, He protected 
God's Cause and defended His Law.  
     That subtle and mysterious Being, that Essence of 
eternal glory, underwent trials and sorrows all the 
days of His life.  He was made the target of every 
calumny and malicious accusation, by foes both 
without and within.  His lot, in all His life, was to be 
wronged, and be subjected to toil, to pain and grief.  
Under these conditions, the one and only solace of 
His sacred heart was to hear good news of the 
progress of the Faith, and the proclaiming of God's 
Word, and the spreading of the holy Teachings, and 
the unity and fervour of the friends, and the 
staunchness of His loved ones.  This news would 
 
+P143 
bring smiles to His countenance; this was the joy of 
His precious heart.  
     Meanwhile He trained a number of the faithful 
and reared them with the hands of His grace, and 
rectified their character and behaviour, and adorned 
them with the excellence of the favoured angels of 
Heaven--that they might arise today with a new 
spirit, and stand forth with wondrous power, and 
confront the forces of idle fancy, and scatter the 
troops upon troops of darkness with the blazing 
light of long endurance and high resolve; that they 
might shine out even as lighted candles, and moth-like, 
flutter so close about the lamp of the Faith as to 
scorch their wings.  
     The Will and Testament of &Abdu'l-Baha, may 
our souls be sacrificed for His meekness, is our 
guiding light upon the path, it is the very bounty of 
the &Abha Kingdom.  This Text is the decisive 
decree, the way that leads aright, the highest hope of 
all who stand firm in the Covenant of the Lord of 
Lords.  It is tidings of great joy; it is the ultimate 
bestowal.  
 
     37.  We rejoiced greatly to learn of the unity 
among the friends, their staunchness, their ardour, 
and the fact that they have established a Spiritual 
Assembly.  It is clear that the stronger grow the 
bonds of yearning love among the believers, and the 
fiercer its fire, the more will they find themselves 
embraced by the bounties of the Ancient of Days, 
 
+P144 
and receiving the continuous confirmations of the 
Greatest Name.  Thus will the Assemblies of the 
friends become reflections of the gardens of the 
Concourse on High, mirroring forth the radiance of 
the &Abha Kingdom.  
     From Their supernal realms and Their immortal 
heights, He the exalted &Bab, and He Who is the 
Beauty of the All-Glorious, and the wondrous 
presence of &Abdu'l-Baha, all These are gazing 
down upon Their faithful loved ones, beholding 
what they do under all conditions, their behaviour 
and conduct, and all their words and ways, waiting 
to cry `Well done!' when They see the Teachings 
carried out, and `Blessed art thou!' to whoso may 
excel in doing the bidding of his Lord.  
     Those divine, those sacred and exalted Beings 
bore every grief, and They accepted tyranny from 
every traitor, to make an &Abha Paradise out of this 
dust heap of the world, and change this place of 
thorns and sorrows into blossoming bowers of love.  
They trained Their loved ones, and fostered them 
with the hands of grace, and sent them forth, with 
countless treasures, with goodly gifts, and with the 
forces of Heaven massed behind them--that they 
might become guides, and holy cup-bearers, of the 
living, soft-flowing waters of divine bestowals.  
     God be thanked, the believers in that country are 
confirmed and blessed, and have arisen to serve the 
Cause, and are straining every nerve to spread the 
heavenly Teachings far and wide.  They are faithful 
ministers at the Holy Shrine of the Blessed Beauty, 
 
+P145 
and true lovers at the sacred Threshold of 
&Abdu'l-Baha.  
 
     38.  That supreme affliction, the passing of 
&Abdu'l-Baha, was the direst of ordeals; it was an 
anguish of mourning.  The parting with mankind's 
Beloved set fire to the hearts of all His lovers, and the 
souls of the believers dissolved in its burning.  Even 
the beauteous dwellers in the &Abha Paradise cried 
out and wept, and in their empyrean abode the 
Maids of Heaven moaned and lamented.  The gems 
of holiness fell a prey to crushing grief, the essences 
of sanctity bowed down in sorrow.  
     That One whom the world has wronged could 
rest neither day nor night.  From moment to 
moment, at the hands of every betrayer, yet another 
cruel arrow was shot into His heart, and ever and 
again, from one or another assailant, He was 
calumny's target.  In the dark of the night, out of the 
depths of His bosom, could be heard His burning 
sighs, and when the day broke, the wondrous music 
of His prayers would rise up to the denizens of the 
realm on high.  
     That Prisoner, grievously wronged, would hide 
His pain, and keep His wounds from view.  In the 
depths of calamity He would smile, and even 
when enduring the direst of afflictions He would 
comfort the hearts.  Although He was hemmed 
about with disasters, and living at the whirlwind's 
core of grief, He would still proclaim the Cause of 
 
+P146 
God, and protect the Holy Faith, and He brought 
God's Word to the ears of those in East and West.  He 
trained and nurtured friends of such a kind that 
whensoever their names were on His lips or spoken 
in His presence, His blessed face would glow and 
His whole being would radiate with joy.  Many and 
many a time He would express His trust and 
confidence.  In the gatherings held toward the close 
of His days, He would repeatedly tell of the apostles 
of Jesus.  Among other things He would say that 
when the Spirit+F1 left this nether world and hastened 
away to the glorious Kingdom, He had but twelve 
disciples, and even of these, one was cast off; and 
that this small number, because they sacrificed all 
they had for Jesus, and immersed themselves in the 
radiance of that sweet and comely Being, and lost 
themselves in Christ, they lit the world.  `Now when 
I depart,' He would say, `I have loyal loved ones that 
number 50,000 or more, and each one of these is a 
mighty fortress to guard the edifice of God, each 
one, for the Ark of the Faith, is strong as armour-plate.  
They are rooted firm as the high mountains, 
they are bright and rising stars, they are jewels, they 
are pearls.'  Today, God be thanked, these qualities 
are radiating from the faces of the righteous, and 
shining upon their brows.  
     That blessed Being perfected His bounties for the 
people of &Baha, and His grace and favour were 
extended to those of all degrees.  In the best of ways, 
he manifested at the end what had been shown forth 
 
+F1 Jesus.  
 
+P147 
at the beginning, crowning all His gifts with His 
Will and Testament, in which He clearly made 
known the obligations devolving upon every stratum 
of the believers, in language most consummate, 
comprehensive and sound, setting down with His 
own pen the name of Shoghi Effendi, as Guardian of 
the Cause and interpreter of the Holy Writ.  The first 
of His bounties was the light He shed, the last of His 
gifts was that He unravelled the secrets by lifting the 
veil.  
     God be praised, all the beloved of God's Beauty 
are immersed in an ocean of bounty and grace, all are 
receiving abundant bestowals from the lights that 
radiate from that Countenance of glory.  
 
    39.  The good news that the Word of God is 
being raised up, and His Cause glorified, and that 
His friends, on fire with love for Him, are arising to 
spread His sweet savours abroad--is coming in 
steadily from every quarter of the globe.  
     All are firmly rooted in the Faith, steadfast, 
turning with complete devotion to him who is the 
appointed and designated Centre, the Guardian of 
the Cause of God, the Chosen Branch, His Eminence 
Shoghi Effendi; are founding Assemblies, 
conducting meetings, teaching most eloquently and 
with all their energies, presenting proofs, disseminating 
the doctrines of the Divine Beauty and the 
counsels of &Abdu'l-Baha.  It is certain that ere long 
 
+P148 
the light of these Teachings will illumine the earth 
and gladden the hearts of the people of &Baha.  
 
     40.  All the virtues of humankind are summed 
up in the one word `steadfastness', if we but act 
according to its laws.  It draws to us as by a magnet 
the blessings and bestowals of Heaven, if we but rise 
up according to the obligations it implies.  
     God be praised, the house of the heart is lit by the 
light of unswerving constancy, and the soul's lodging 
is bedecked with the ornament of faithfulness.  
     Steadfastness is a treasure that makes a man so rich 
as to have no need of the world or any person or any 
thing that is therein.  Constancy is a special joy, that 
leads us mortals on to lofty heights, great progress, 
and the winning of the perfections of Heaven.  All 
praise be to the Beloved's holy court, for granting 
this most wondrous grace to His faithful people, and 
to His favoured ones, this best of gifts.  
 
     41.  It is clear how that most dire of calamities, 
that most great disaster which was the ascension of 
&Abdu'l-Baha, may our souls be sacrificed for His 
meekness, has set our hearts on fire and dissolved 
our very limbs and members in grief.  Darkness 
settled on our souls, of blood were our tears.  Even 
the essences of sanctity cried out in fear, and the 
gems of holiness moaned and lamented, while our 
 
+P149 
own inner selves fell to ashes, and there was no peace 
left in the soul, no patience in the heart.  
     No more does the ardent nightingale carol its 
joyous songs, and the sweet and holy melodies of the 
immortal dove are hushed.  That gleaming Moon is 
hidden now behind the clouds of everlasting life, that 
Orb of the high heavens sank down at the setting 
point of glory and rose into the skies of the world that 
we see not, and above the realm of the placeless He is 
casting forth His rays.  
     With His departure, these afflicted ones were 
plunged into a sea of pain, and beaten and blown 
about in a whirlwind of anguish more violent than the 
spoken or the written word can tell.  Our days wear 
away in tears, our nights in sighing, and it is this 
storm of grief and regret and yearning that has kept us 
from writing before now, even to send you our love.  
     It is certain that the people of &Baha, who are the 
dwellers of the Crimson Ark and breast the seas of the 
Lord, and who have attained to the bounties of the 
&Abha realm, and who are steadfast in the Covenant
--they, men and women alike, young and old alike, 
share with these homeless ones the anguish of our 
bereavement and this direst of ordeals.  We could 
hear, with the ear of the spirit, the wailing of those 
lovers of Him Who was the Ravisher of hearts, those 
like us scorched by the fires of separation, and from 
our own sad hearts we would lift our cries of sorrow 
to the heavens, and weeping would send up our 
entreaties in such words as these, to the threshold of 
the luminous Beauty of God:  
 
+P150 
     O kind Lord!  O Comforter of anguished hearts!  
     Send down Thy mercy upon us, and Thy grace, 
bestow upon us patience, give us the strength to 
endure.  With Thy generous hand, lay Thou a balm 
upon our sores, grant us a medicine for this never-healing 
woe.  Console Thou Thy loved ones, comfort 
Thy friends and handmaids, heal Thou our 
wounded breasts, and with Thy bounty's remedy, 
restore our festering hearts.  
     With the gentle breeze of Thy compassion, make 
fresh and green again these boughs, withered by 
autumn blasts; restore Thou to flourishing life these 
flowers, shrivelled by the blight of bereavement.  
     With tidings of the &Abha Paradise, wed Thou 
our souls to joy, and rejoice Thou our spirits with 
heartening voices from the dwellers in the realm of 
glory.  
     Thou art the Bounteous, Thou art the Clement; 
Thou art the Bestower, the Loving.  
     From the first dawning of the new light, that 
noble land shone with the rays of the Great 
Announcement, and was lit by the sunbeams of the 
Ancient Beauty.  Like heavy rains, the bounties beat 
upon that sacred place, and out of clouds of mercy, 
grace showered down upon that region of resplendence, 
bringing freshness and new greenery, and the 
trees of being then turned verdant, and there burst 
forth blossoms of the spirit, and wind-flowers of 
true knowledge blew, and mystic myrtles grew and 
flourished.  And from out of that land came musk-laden 
gales, scenting with their perfume the other 
 
+P151 
lands as well, and scattering far and wide the 
musk-deer sweetness of heavenly mysteries.  
     So it was that &Khurasan became the grove of the 
lions of God, and a nesting-place for the birds of the 
&Ridvan Paradise.  The Ancient Beauty singled out 
that blessed land for special favour, extending to it 
uncounted blessings and gifts.  Now in wondrous 
and most sweet voice, again with the tracings of His 
exalted pen, and on the head of each one of the 
beloved in that bright region, He set a crown of 
imperishable glory, and He robed each one with His 
bestowals and grace, and wrapped each one in a 
mantle of spiritual perfections.  Of them all He spoke 
the highest praise, and to all He gave abundant 
blessings, as is proved by the text of His scrolls and 
Tablets.  And whenever that sacred King of all the 
world would speak of &Khurasan, His being would 
stir for joy, and His luminous face would grow still 
brighter with exceeding gladness.  His bounties 
never ceased, and from clouds of grace His favours 
continually showered down upon that land.  
     Then came the era of the Covenant, and that full 
cup was passed from hand to hand, and the Sun of 
the Covenant rose up, shedding abroad on the 
horizon of unity the rays of servitude and thraldom, 
and lighting up the hearts of humankind.  New life 
was breathed into the body of the world, and into 
the human soul came a fresh measure of delight.  The 
hearts of the people of &Baha rejoiced to hear the 
glad-tidings from the &Abha Kingdom, and the 
minds of those who had sought shelter under the 
 
+P152 
Tree of holiness were illumined with beams of 
fidelity and faith.  Once again, the loved ones in that 
region were inebriated with the wine of the Primal 
Covenant, and in their firmness and steadfastness 
and loyalty they led the field.  They showed forth 
such constancy as to astonish the mind, and they 
manifested such power and endurance as to raze the 
piled-up doubts of the doubters to the ground.  Of 
the poisoned winds of violation there was no trace 
left in all that land.  The hopes of the disaffected were 
blighted, and the centre of violation clearly witnessed 
the defeat of all his aims and plans.  
     It is certain that those who have caught the 
fragrance blowing from the &Abha Paradise, those 
who have heard the nightingale singing from the 
immortal gardens and taken delight therein, those 
who have trembled for joy, and whose souls have 
been renewed when the breezes of holiness out of the 
bowers of the All-Merciful were wafted over them
--will find the raven's croaking and cawing a 
wearisome thing, and can only turn from it and flee 
away.  
     For thirty long years, from the hour of 
&Baha'u'llah's ascension until His own immaculate 
spirit passed into the light of the all-highest realm, 
&Abdu'l-Baha rested neither night nor day.  Single 
and alone, a prisoner, a victim of tyranny, He rose 
up to reform the world--to refine and train and 
educate the human race.  He watered the tree of the 
Faith, He sheltered it from the whirlwind and the 
lightning bolt, He protected God's holy Cause, He 
 
+P153 
guarded the divine law, He defeated its adversaries, 
He frustrated the hopes of those who wished it ill.  
     All His life long, that quintessence of eternal 
glory, that subtle and mysterious Being, was subjected 
to trials and ordeals.  He was the target of 
every calumny, of every false accusation, from 
enemies both without and within.  To be a victim of 
oppression was His lot in this world's life, and all He 
knew of it was toil and pain.  In the dark of the night, 
He would sigh out His grief, and as He chanted His 
prayers at the hour of dawn, that wondrous voice of 
His would rise up to the inmates of Heaven.  
     Under such conditions, He trained and with His 
own hand fostered a number of souls who would 
stand as a mighty fortress protecting the Cause, and 
as armour-plate for the Ark of the Covenant.  With 
awesome power, these would scatter the forces of 
illusion, and with heavy blows, strike down the false 
rumours of the people of doubt.  God be praised, that 
labour bore fruit, and the meaning of those toilsome 
efforts became plain.  Those blessed souls rose up in 
all their loyalty, and with their steadfastness and 
long-suffering they served as shining examples for 
the children of salvation.  
     His bounties, His favours to the people of &Baha 
were made perfect, and extended to every class and 
kind.  And as at the beginning, so at the end:  His final 
bestowal of all, a crowning adornment, was His 
Will and Testament.  Here, to &Baha'is of every 
degree, in the clearest, most complete, most unmistakable 
of utterances, He described the obligation of 
 
+P154 
each one, explicitly appointed, irrefutably and in 
writing, the Centre of the Faith, designating the 
Guardian of the Cause and the interpreter of the 
Holy Book, His Eminence Shoghi Effendi, appointing 
him, the Chosen Branch, as the one toward 
whom all must turn.  Thus He closed for all time the 
doors of contention and strife, and in the best of 
ways and in a most perfect method He pointed out 
the path that leads aright.  
     Thus by its very roots He pulled out the tree of 
mischief and dissension.  He razed the structure of 
violation to the ground.  He left no margin for error, 
no room for doubts.  And thus He crowned the first 
of all His loving-kindnesses with this last of them.  
Let us praise and thank God for this supreme gift, 
this great bounty.  
     Following that disaster of His passing, that dire 
ordeal, Shoghi Effendi, the Guardian of the Cause, 
was overwhelmed by such never-ending grief and 
by his now heavy burden and supreme responsibility, 
that his sensitive heart could bear it no more.  
And so, after making the necessary arrangements, 
he sent out a letter expressing his wish to be alone for 
a time, in a quiet and secluded place, away from the 
noise and turmoil of everyday life--there to pray 
and supplicate and urgently beg for help from the 
realm of the All-Glorious.  
     With this in mind, he has gone on a journey, 
leaving us to loneliness and grief.  Our hope is that 
very soon, the good results of this journey will 
become apparent, and that the friends will rejoice to 
 
+P155 
see the important benefits that it will yield; that he 
will soon come home, and that once again correspondence 
with him can be resumed, and the doors of 
access will be opened wide.  
 
     42.  All praise to the omnipotent Lord, that in 
this auspicious day He Who is the Sun of bounty has 
shone out so fair and bright as to light up the world 
of the hearts.  He has burned away the veils of 
waywardness and ignorance.  He has struck off the 
fetters of baseless myths and ignoble concepts that 
chained the people hand and foot.  He has cleansed 
and burnished the mirrors of men's souls, sullied by 
the dust and rust of this dark world.  He has opened 
wide the door to that Celestial Tavern of matchless 
wine, and He is freely pouring out the immortal 
draught of knowledge and perception and love.  He 
has hoisted the banner of oneness, and destroyed the 
foundations of estrangement.  Under the sway of 
His unity, the many-coloured races and diverse 
religions have tasted the rose-red wine of His love, 
and are aliens no more.  Those pure in spirit who 
have set eyes upon Him, and approached the place 
He dwells in, reflecting Him have shone out like 
mirrors, and cleaving to Him alone, they have 
detached their hearts from all else but Him.  They 
have heard, with their inner ears, His words, and 
they have noted His ways, and forgotten all else.  
They are ever soaring upward, out of the lower 
 
+P156 
world to the world above, and they are fit to be told 
the mysteries, and they understand them.  
     Such a day, then, is a day for praise and thanks, a 
time of benedictions and blessings, a time to wash 
away the stains of earth's defilement.  
     Let us turn our hearts to the world aloft, and cup 
our hands and supplicate our matchless Loved One, 
and urgently entreat Him, saying:  
     O Thou Kind Bestower, O Nourisher of our 
souls and hearts!  
     We have no aim, except to walk Thy path; we 
have no wish, except to bring Thee joy.  Our souls 
are united, and our hearts are welded, each to each.  
In offering Thee our thanks and praise, in following 
Thy ways and soaring in Thy skies, we are all one.  
     We are helpless, stand Thou by us, and give us 
strength.  
     Thou art the Protector, the Provider, the Kind.  
 
     43.  Indeed, you have adorned yourself with the 
qualifications of faithfulness and are striving to fulfil 
the requirements of servitude to the &Abha 
Threshold.  You have been inebriated with the wine 
of the love of God, have quaffed your fill at the 
banquet of loyalty to His Faith and have caused the 
seekers of truth, those that are sore athirst for the 
life-giving waters of His grace, to drink from the 
heavenly stream of true understanding.  This was 
indeed most fitting and appropriate.  For in this 
grievous calamity, this distressing bereavement, the 
 
+P157 
best consolation and solace that the spiritual souls 
could offer is to dedicate themselves to the service of 
the Cause, to diffuse widely the sweet savours of 
holiness, to become wanderers in the path of that 
heavenly Best-Beloved, to let their whole beings 
burn and melt, and be enkindled with the fire of His 
love.  Such indeed is the effective remedy, the most 
potent cure for this irreparable agony, for this 
aching of the heart and soul.  There is no other 
remedy.  
     Praise be to God that the effusions of celestial aid 
from the &Abha Kingdom are unceasing and the 
outpourings of heavenly grace from the Concourse 
on High uninterrupted.  You should not think that 
your memory may ever, even for a moment, be 
removed from the minds of these oppressed ones, or 
that your remembrance may fade from the hearts of 
these exiled servants.  The &Abha Beauty bears me 
witness and &Abdu'l-Baha is my testimony that no 
word can possibly express how indissoluble are the 
ties of spiritual communion and fellowship that bind 
us to the loved ones of God and to the handmaids of 
the Merciful.  
 
     44.  The deep heart's love and the longing of the 
soul of this wronged one for those spiritual beloved 
ones, and in particular for those who are kin to the 
peerless Holy Tree of sanctity and oneness, cannot 
be told in words, and my most ardent wish is that I 
might correspond with each one of you, but our 
alarm and grief over this momentous happening, 
 
+P158 
this terrible affliction and ill-omened agony, this inexorable 
divine decree, the passing of &Abdu'l-Baha
--may our souls be offered up for all the 
wrongs He bore!--has left us wretched, desolate, 
to such a degree that there is no peace in the 
spirit, no will to endure in the heart.  
     This is an earthquake which shook the foundations 
of our lives, this is a wailing and an uproar 
within the Company on High.  The lightning bolt of 
this departure has set the very world aflame, and the 
fires of this leave-taking have scorched the whole 
earth.  
     The grieving dwellers in the courts of holiness 
have rent their garments of long-suffering, and the 
household of the Most High have put on mourning 
dress.  Truly the people of &Baha and those who are 
kin to the divine Lote-Tree are sharing with us the 
pangs of this bereavement, this direst of torments, 
and are partners in anguish of those who suffer here.  
     Now that this dread event has come upon us all, it 
is to be hoped that new stirrings and wondrous new 
vibrations will be felt; that a renewed staunchness 
and fidelity, an ever more vigorous firmness and 
loyalty, will take over and astound the world.  Thus 
all will clearly understand that even though that 
sacred and mysterious Being has laid aside the 
garment of His mortal life, even though that Bird of 
eternity has abandoned the cage of this earth, still is 
His spirit in our midst, still is He watching over us 
all from the realm of the All-Glorious, ever is He 
gladdening the hearts of the beloved, and to the 
 
+P159 
souls of those who are fast-rooted in the Covenant, 
ever is He bringing tidings of great joy.  
 
     45.  The good news has come that the Will and 
Testament of &Abdu'l-Baha, may our lives be 
sacrificed for His meekness, has been read at the 
meetings of the friends, and we here are rejoiced to 
learn of their unity and their steadfastness and 
loyalty, and of their directing themselves toward the 
designated Centre, the named and specified Guardian 
of the Cause of God, the interpreter of the Book 
of God, the protector of His Faith, the keeper of His 
Law, Shoghi Effendi.  This news brought extreme 
joy.  
     It is certain that enlightened and sensitive minds 
and spiritual hearts will continually obtain illumination 
from the Centre of Mysteries, and beg for 
bounties in abundance from Him Who is the Celestial 
Beauty Unconstrained.  The ear of their intellect 
is hearkening to the divine call from the Company 
on High, and they drink the draught of faithfulness 
from bounty's cup.  To them, all that is not the 
Beloved is nothing at all, and from whatever is not 
the good-pleasure of God, they veil their eyes.  They 
worship truth, they seek reality, and they are 
intoxicated with the wine of His love.  
     God be praised, you have attained these bestowals.  
Now is the time for zeal and ardour, the season 
of fervour and joy.  Thoughts must be focused on 
one Centre, opinions united on a single point, to 
publish abroad the Teachings of God and to act in 
 
+P160 
accord with the counsels of &Abdu'l-Baha, so that 
the light of divine confirmations may wax ever 
brighter, and the bounties of divine favour and 
success appear on every side, and that in a brief 
period, great progress will be made, and secrets now 
hidden will be divulged, and joy and radiance will 
appear.  
     It is to be hoped that out of the concealed and 
manifest favour of the &Abha Beauty, He will 
generate a new spirit in His loyal loved ones, and 
make them to radiate a new and wondrous joy.  This 
indeed does not seem far from the outpourings of 
His bounties and bestowals.  
 
     46.  In this noblest of all ages the Sun of grace 
and loving-kindness has shone out from the divine 
day-spring with such resplendent glory and is casting 
His beams so bright and far, that He has lit up all the 
earth and made the hearts and minds of men to be as 
sanctified mirrors and reflectors of holiness--this to 
such a degree that from turning their faces unto that 
bright Orb, that Star of the loftiest heaven, those 
illumined beings have received abundant grace and 
have been enabled to understand the secret of God's 
oneness, and the mystery of His unity, and to 
become alert to subtle realities.  
     Praised be God the Beloved that He has disclosed, 
through His invisible bounties and visible grace, 
such secrets, and drawn such veils aside.  Words have 
taken on new meaning, and meaning itself has been 
adorned with the divine.  A clear Covenant makes 
 
+P161 
our duty plain; an explicit and lucid Text explains 
the revealed Book; a specifically named Centre has 
been designated, toward whom all must turn, and 
the pronouncement of him who is the Guardian of 
the Cause and the interpreter of the Book has been 
made the decisive decree.  All this is out of the grace 
and favour of our Beloved, the All-Glorious, and 
the loving-kindness of Him from the splendours of 
Whose servitude earth and heaven were illumined.  
     &Abdu'l-Baha, may our lives be sacrificed for His 
meekness, has filled to overflowing the cup of 
bounty for the people of &Baha, and encompassed 
with His grace persons of every degree.  He has 
destroyed the very basis of disunity, ruined any 
attempts at dissension and mischief, and clearly 
pointed out to all the highway of guidance, now and 
for evermore.  
     The hope is that we may arise with a new spirit 
and be confirmed with bountiful blessings, and urge 
on our steeds in the field of service, of purity and 
sincerity, and of high endeavour--nor is this much 
to ask of the loving-kindness and grace of our 
exalted Lord.  
 
     47.  The purport of your letter is highly indicative 
of your steadfastness in His Cause, of your 
unswerving constancy in the Covenant, of having 
set your face toward Shoghi Effendi, the authorized 
Point to whom all must turn, the Centre of the Cause, 
the Chosen Branch, the bough that has branched out 
from the twin heavenly Trees.  Indeed, this is the 
 
+P162 
essential thing, this is the meaning of true devotion, 
this is the unshakable, the indubitable truth whereby 
the people of &Baha, the dwellers of the Crimson 
Ark, are distinguished.  
     The loved ones of the All-Merciful are those that 
have truly served the Most Exalted One,+F1 have been 
nurtured by the hand of the &Abha Beauty, have 
received training under the care of &Abdu'l-Baha
--may our life be sacrificed for the wrongs suffered 
by Them.  Such souls have drunk from the soft-flowing 
river of true understanding, have quaffed 
their fill from the living waters of assurance, have set 
their affection on the one true God, and have rid 
themselves of all attachment to aught except Him.  
They tread the straight path of truth and stride along 
His undeviating way.  They incline their attentive 
ears to the Call of the Concourse on High and are 
attracted to the Celestial Voice ringing from the 
realms of glory.  Great indeed is their blessedness, and 
may they meet with a good ending.  
     We earnestly hope that through the bounty of the 
Lord of eternity a fresh measure of His confirmations 
may soon appear and you may be encompassed by 
His pervasive aid and assistance.  
 
     48.  At this hour while yet the heart burns with 
the anguish of sorrow, and the gloom of bereavement 
still hangs low, my thoughts turn in loving 
remembrance to my sincere beloved sisters and 
brothers in the Cause.  
 
+F1 The &Bab.  
 
+P163 
     The news of your firmness in the Covenant, of 
your endeavour to work in unity and harmony, and 
of your untiring zeal and devotion in the Path of 
Service, has been a source of untold joy to me.  For 
now my sole comfort lies in the loyalty and faithfulness 
of the friends, and my one joy in the progress of 
the Cause.  
     Dear friends!  At this critical time through which 
the Cause is passing the responsibility that has fallen 
on every individual &Baha'i is great, and his duties 
are pressing and manifold.  Now that the Sun of the 
Covenant has set on the horizon of the world, the 
eyes of all the people are turned expectant upon us.  
Now the time has come for the faithful friends of 
&Abdu'l-Baha, who have been the recipients of the 
Glorious Light, to shine forth even as brilliant stars.  
The radiance of our Faith must be such as to dispel 
the clouds of doubt and guide the world to the 
Day-spring of Truth.  
     Our firmness must be such as to cause him who 
wavers and errs to turn back penitent unto the fold; 
our unity and love must be such as to cause the 
peoples of the world to join hands in amity and 
brotherhood; and our activity in service must be 
such as to have all parts of the world resound with 
the echoes of `&YA-BAHA'U'L-ABHA!'.  
     For inspiration and guidance let us turn unto His 
life-imparting exhortations:  `O friends, show forth 
your fidelity!  O my loved ones, manifest your steadfastness 
and your constancy!  O ye who invoke His Name, 
turn ye and hold fast unto Him!  O ye who lift up your 
 
+P164 
hearts and implore His aid, cling to Him and walk in His 
ways!  It is incumbent upon every one of us to encourage 
each other, to exert our utmost endeavour to diffuse His 
divine fragrances and engage in exalting His Word.  We 
must, at all times, be stirred by the breeze that bloweth 
from the rose-garden of His loving-kindness, and be 
perfumed with the fragrances of the mystic flowers of His 
grace.'  
     Thus does &Abdu'l-Baha still call to us from His 
realm of effulgent glory.  Will not each of us hearken 
unto His voice, and exert the utmost endeavour to 
fulfil His hopes?  
     Dear friends, this is the day of faithfulness; this is 
the day of unity; this is the day of service.  Let us not 
wait, nor ponder, but, detached from the world and 
its concerns, clad in the armour of faith, filled with 
the divine spirit of love, and quickened by His 
life-giving exhortations, let us arise in utmost love 
and harmony, hasten to the field of service, and 
subdue the domain of hearts with the arms of the 
love of God and the sword of peace and brotherhood.  
     For all inspiration and assurance let us turn unto 
&Baha'u'llah's promise:  `Be not dismayed, O peoples 
of the world, when the day-star of My beauty is set, and 
the heaven of My tabernacle is concealed from your eyes.  
Arise to further My Cause, and to exalt My Word 
amongst men.  We are with you at all times, and shall 
strengthen you through the power of truth.  We are truly 
almighty.'  
     Dear friends!  A great obligation of every &Baha'i 
 
+P165 
is vigilance to protect and shield the stronghold of the 
Faith from the onslaught of the enemies.  In these days 
their activity has waxed strong.  They are constantly 
on the alert, and exert the utmost endeavour to cause 
such harm as would impede the onward march of the 
Cause.  
     Association with such people will cause discord 
and unrest among the friends and will be detrimental 
to the progress of the Cause.  Therefore it is urgent 
that the friends exercise great wisdom and vigilance 
lest through the evil schemes of the enemies a breach 
be made in the Faith.  The few people whom 
&Abdu'l-Baha pronounced as injurious to the Cause 
must be shunned by all the friends, as Shoghi Effendi 
himself tells us to do in his second letter to the 
American believers.  
 
     49.  O steadfast ones, gathered beneath the 
&Abha Beauty's standard of oneness, O faithful 
lovers of &Abdu'l-Baha!  Sad news has come to us out 
of Iran in recent days, and it has intensely grieved the 
entire &Baha'i world:  they have, in most parts of that 
land, set bonfires of envy and malevolence, and 
hoisted the banner of aggression against this 
much-wronged community; they have left no means 
untried, no plot or strategy neglected, and have arisen 
with extreme hostility and spite to pull out by their 
very roots the trees of this garden of God.  
     From every side, they are aiming their arrows at 
hearts that rejoice in the knowledge of God and are 
 
+P166 
filled with the love of Him.  From every ambush, 
they are hunting down gazelles that pasture in the 
meadows of His unity.  They are taking the men and 
women believers captive, and making orphans of 
the children.  They are plundering the believers' 
property, sacking their hearths and homes.  
     Those, however, who have been trained and 
educated in the school of God, even when coming to 
such a pass, are resignation itself, and to the brutal 
aggressor they are as the living waters of Heaven.  
They are rivers of pure mercy and peace.  Though 
powerful and well able to defend themselves, they 
never raise a hand to strike, nor do they open their 
lips to protest.  They confront the others' taunts and 
curses with prayers that God will forgive them, and 
their reply to the wounds of bullet and sword is to 
offer milk and honey.  They kiss the murderer's 
hand; as intoxicated lovers, they drain the martyr's 
cup.  
     Such is the way of those who are attracted to His 
Kingdom, and that other is the behaviour of the 
foolish, the heedless of God.  So has it been, at the 
time when the Manifestations of God appeared:  the 
heedless and the ignorant turned upon their 
heavenly Teachers, and the diseased harried and 
tortured their loving Physicians in the spirit, idly 
thinking that they were acquiring merit thereby.  
Thus have their imaginings always been, at the 
outset of every Faith:  that by such cruel acts they 
could destroy that seed, the Word of God; or that by 
blowing against it, they could put out the lamp that 
 
+P167 
He has lit; or that by directing a storm of denial 
against them, they could bring down His trees, so 
flourishing, so firmly rooted in His Kingdom, or lay 
His fair gardens in ruins.  
     But as, time and again, experience has shown, in 
every age they have only seen verified the Blessed 
Beauty's assurance that calamity's rushing rain is the  
greening of His planted field, and afflictions are the oil 
that feeds and adds to the radiance of the lamp of God.  
And then, as the days go by, and they see with their 
own eyes the Day-Star in its noonday splendour, 
witness the bewildering richness of the fields that 
God has sown, behold His great and all-pervading 
Cause--then the fires of hatred and envy flame out of 
the hell of their natures; they can contain themselves 
no longer, and the truth of the holy words is proved, 
that God will not bring down a people from their 
station unless they have corrupted their good qualities 
themselves, and it becomes clearly shown that 
God brings on the downfall of the heedless little by 
little and in ways that they know not.  
     During occurrences of this kind, it is incumbent 
upon the believers in other countries to immediately 
adopt prudent and reasonable measures, that through 
wise methods such fires may be put out.  Let them not 
allow the claws of ravening wolves to be reddened 
with their brothers' blood; let them defend God's 
lambs from the hungry leopard's knife-sharp teeth; 
let them guard the members of the one and single 
&Baha'i family from the poisoned sting of scorpions 
and snakes.  
 
+P168 
     This is the unique obligation of the &Baha'is of 
the world.  Addressing the believers, Baha'u'llah 
says:  `Be ye as the fingers of one hand, the members 
of one body.'  This means that just as each member 
safeguards the rest, warding off any threatened 
harm, so too must the individual &Baha'is do, 
whether in the East or the West.  At this time it is 
urgently needful, and it is the request of this grieving 
servant, that the assembly of the believers in that 
area act at once, and take the case to the ambassador 
of the Iranian government.  Let them tell him, `The 
holy Cause of &Baha'u'llah has so unified us who are 
His world-wide followers, and has brought us so 
close together, that we have become like a single 
body.  If the foot of a &Baha'i, in the farthest Eastern 
land, is so much as scratched by a thorn, it is even as 
if we &Baha'is here in the West had suffered the 
same.  We have now received word from &Iran that 
in &Shiraz, in &Sultanabad, in &Hamadan, in 
&Kashan, even in &Tihran, and in other places as 
well, the fanaticism of the ignorant and heedless has 
been fanned into flame, and that agitators are stirring 
up the populace--with the result that our brothers 
and sisters, who are but well-wishers of all humankind 
and are indeed the world's only hope for peace, 
and are obedient and helpful citizens of Iran and her 
government, find themselves under attack and 
pushed into the heart of the fire.  
     `We therefore request the representative of Iran 
to ask his government to safeguard our brothers in 
Iran from the aggressions of their enemies, and to 
deliver that flock of God's lovers from the claws of 
 
+P169 
the wolf, and provide for their security and well-being.  
By bringing us word of this outcome, &Iran 
will earn the deep and heartfelt gratitude of 
thousands of &Baha'is who reside in these countries, 
and widespread appreciation will be voiced by 
us in our many gatherings, of her government's 
good offices on our behalf.'  
     And further, if it be possible, you should make 
this same representation through your own ambassador 
in &Tihran, so that he may direct the attention 
of the Iranian authorities to these persecutions, and 
awaken that government to the possibility of divine 
retribution and to the shameful stigma occasioned 
by such actions directed against this innocent community 
by the heedless and ignorant amongst the 
mass of the people.  
     Let him make them aware that there are thousands 
of adherents of this Faith of the love of God around 
the world, who are gazing in astonishment and 
disbelief at the savage acts now being perpetrated 
against their brothers, and are eagerly waiting to 
hear that the government has come to the rescue of 
this unique, this law-abiding people, who are the 
well-wishers of mankind, from the attacks of the 
ravening wolves.  
     I pray for you continually at the Holy Threshold, 
and call upon Him on behalf of each one of you, and 
beg that He will bestow on you the blessings of the 
Kingdom.  
     Upon you, men and women alike, be the Glory of 
the All-Glorious.  
 
+P170 
     50.  A physician treats every illness with a 
certain remedy and to every painful sore he applies 
a specially prepared compound.  The more severe 
the illness, the more potent must be the remedy, so 
that the treatment may prove effective and the 
illness cured.  Now consider, when the divine Physician+F1 
determined to conceal His countenance 
from the gaze of men and take His flight to the 
&Abha Kingdom, He knew in advance what a 
violent shock, what a tremendous impact, the 
effect of this devastating blow would have upon 
His beloved friends and devoted lovers.  Therefore 
He prepared a highly potent remedy and compounded 
a unique and incomparable cure--a cure 
most exquisite, most glorious, most excellent, 
most powerful, most perfect, and most consummate.  
And through the movement of His Pen of 
eternal bounty He recorded in His weighty and 
inviolable Testament the name of Shoghi Effendi
--the bough that has grown from the two offshoots 
of the celestial glory, the branch that has 
branched from the two hallowed and sacred 
Lote-Trees.  Then He winged His flight to the 
Concourse on High and to the luminous horizon.  
Now it devolves upon every well-assured and 
devoted friend, every firm and enkindled believer 
enraptured by His love, to drink this healing 
remedy at one draught, so that the agony of 
bereavement may be somewhat alleviated and the 
bitter anguish of separation dissipated.  This calls 
 
+F1 &Abdu'l-Baha.  
 
+P171 
for efforts to serve the Cause, to diffuse the sweet 
savours of God, to manifest selflessness, consecration 
and self-sacrifice in our labours in His Path.  
 
     51.  I was very glad to know of your meeting 
with the Chinese students, and I am sure your effect 
and influence shall be great upon them because their 
fresh and receptive minds are ready to grasp the 
importance of this Manifestation; and when you go 
to China, which you may if you think it wise, your 
influence and success, I hope, will be still more.  
     I pray God that He should confirm you in your 
teaching, and when you go to China, He should 
make you a pioneer in carrying the Message of this 
Dispensation to the farthermost countries of the 
world and to the most obscure.  
     The members of the Holy Family join me in 
extending to you their love and &Baha'i greetings, 
and may the spirit of &Abdu'l-Baha guide you and 
keep you.  
 
     52.  We were delighted to receive your excellent 
letter ... and read it with joy.  It gladdens our hearts 
to witness from its contents the evidences of loyalty 
and sincerity and perfect steadfastness in the Cause 
of God, and unshakeable constancy in His Covenant.  
     I offered praise to my Lord, the All-Glorious, for 
His abundant blessings, the prodigality of His 
 
+P172 
bestowals, and His wondrous grace; for He has 
created such spiritual beings, such illumined essences, 
who attract bounty from the Sun of Truth, and 
are lit by its heavenly light, which unravels the 
mysteries, parts the curtains, and tears aside the veils.  
He has sent forth pure and holy souls whom the 
blame of the blamer cannot shut out from the Faith of 
God, nor frighten away from establishing the truth of 
His Teachings.  These are they whose thirst is 
quenched, whose ills are healed, whose hearts are 
gladdened, whose minds are set at rest, whose souls 
are stirred, whose spirits rejoice, whose eyes find 
consolation by beholding the splendours of the 
beauty, and the graces of perfection, that come 
down, one following after another, from the firmament 
of glory.  Well is it with them for such wondrous 
gifts, and bliss be to them for such blessings!  
     As for me, acquainted with great grief as I am, 
subjected as I am to calamities, I have no solace in this 
dire ordeal that has suddenly come upon me to darken 
my days, save only to see happiness in the hearts of the 
believers; to breathe in the sweet scents of loving-kindness 
from the gardens of their hearts, and to 
behold the sparkling lights of unity amongst God's 
chosen ones, and to note how widespread are the 
breaths of fellow-feeling and love amongst the 
righteous, and how His teachings and the Will and 
Testament of &Abdu'l-Baha are being disseminated 
throughout those lands--always in accord with 
wisdom, as enjoined by the Almighty and set forth in 
the Writings.  
 
+P173 
     I beg of God, even as a pauper, and I implore Him 
with all lowliness, feebleness and contrition, to 
assist you all with His unseen favours, and open 
before your eyes the portals of His bounty and 
grace, and make ready for you whatsoever you 
desire out of His everlasting bestowals, and make all 
things easy for you, and fulfil your hopes--so that in 
serving the Faith of your Lord, the Glory of the 
All-Glorious, you will reach your furthermost 
goals.  Verily is He the Almighty, the Ever-Forgiving.  
     I beg of Him too, that He will cause every 
difficulty to vanish away, and will dispel every 
cloud, until it becomes possible for you to present 
yourselves at this blessed, this luminous and fragrant 
Spot, and bow down your foreheads in the dust 
of this bright Threshold, and attain this ultimate 
goal, for the friends long to behold you.  
     Again, I supplicate the Eternal Glory to send 
down His herald of holiness with the garment in his 
hands,+F1 that all eyes may be solaced and all hearts 
rejoiced by the return to this country of the Chosen 
Branch, the Guardian of the Cause of God, Shoghi 
Effendi, in the briefest of times.  This indeed is well 
within the reach of the bounties of our Almighty and 
All-Generous Lord.  
 
     53.  Following the ascension of &Abdu'l-Baha 
to the &Abha Kingdom the only thing that can afford 
 
+F1 See &Qur'an 12:93.  
 
+P174 
consolation to the heart of this grief-stricken and 
wronged maidservant is to see the lovers of that 
luminous Countenance happy, joyful and radiant 
and to behold the diffusion of the sweet savours of 
God, the exaltation of His Word, and the growth of 
His Faith.  Nothing else matters.  
     The duty of the concourse of the faithful in this 
day should be but one duty, their purpose but one 
purpose, their aim but one aim, and the object of 
their endeavour but one object, and this is none 
other than to foster the spirit of unity and harmony, 
to serve and teach His Cause and to promote His 
Word.  Such is the meaning of true faithfulness; and 
in this lies the good-pleasure of &Abdu'l-Baha.  
 
     54.  The letter that you wrote in your burning 
grief, on the passing of the world's Beloved, the Orb 
of the Covenant--wrote with weeping eyes and a 
heart afire, has come.  Once again, it brings back the 
full force of this calamity, and renews our mourning.  
This was the most ruinous of disasters, the 
most dreaded of ordeals, the most hurtful of misfortunes.  
It was an earthquake that shook the pillars of 
the world; it caused a tumult and an uproar among 
the dwellers of earth and heaven.  This terrible 
separation came upon us as an inescapable trial and a 
dismal decree.  It destroyed all hopes of happiness, 
and all joy perished.  By this departure, the sparkling 
stars were dimmed, and the heavens of mystic 
meaning split apart.  It set the skies on fire, it 
 
+P175 
scorched the seven spheres.  From this departure, 
sorrow enveloped all mankind, it brought pain and 
tears to all the peoples of the earth.  The lightning 
bolt of it consumed the world and struck the hearts 
of its inhabitants, so that they put on sackcloth and 
poured ashes on their heads.  This disaster, coming 
all unawares, made the morning dark, and turned 
bright noon to night.  From our breasts rose burning 
sighs, and from our eyes streamed our life blood.  
Even the Concourse on High moaned and lamented, 
and their clamour rose to the highest Heaven, and 
the weeping denizens of the pavilions of glory, 
striking at their faces, raised their plaintive cries.  
Mourning, shedding tears, their garments rent, 
their heads uncovered, their feet bare, the Maids of 
Heaven hastened out of their lofty, immaculate 
chambers, and groaned and cried out.  
     &Abdu'l-Baha, may our lives be sacrificed for His    
sacred dust, that peerless Beloved of the world, 
from the day that &Baha'u'llah ascended until the 
hour of His own spotless soul's departure to the 
kingdom of light and the realm beyond, had neither 
a quiet night's rest nor a peaceful day, for thirty 
years.  At all times His heart wept and sorrowed, and 
in the dark of the night from His anguished breast 
rose burning sighs, sorely wounded as He was by 
the arrows of the opposers and the rebellious.  Then 
at first light, He would lift up His wondrous, 
melodious voice and commune with the dwellers in 
the high mansions of Heaven.  
     He would face the storms of tribulation with a 
 
+P176 
heart full of fervour and love; He would breast the 
waves of calamities and oncoming ordeals with 
overflowing joy.  With the balm of His loving-kindness, 
He would remedy unhealing wounds, and 
the medicine of His unending grace was a cure for 
mortal ills.  Through His tenderness and care the 
sorrowful found comfort, and through His Words 
the despairing received the blissful consolation of 
their incomparable Lord.  He would hearten the 
despised and the rejected with outpourings of grace.  
     In the pathway of &Baha'u'llah, He made His 
holy breast a shield to bear adversities, made His 
beauteous face a target for the blows that rained 
upon Him from all sides.  He, the Wronged One of 
the world, was compassed about by rebel hosts; the 
armies of treachery assailed Him from every direction.  
The disaffected were not remiss in their cruelty 
and aggression; never once did that arrogant crew 
fail to spread a calumny or to show their opposition 
and their malice.  At every moment, they inflicted 
wounds upon Him, injured Him, brought fresh 
grief to His heart.  Their sole aim was to bring down 
the structure of the Holy Faith and to destroy its 
very base and foundation.  They did all in their  
power to split the &Baha'i community, and in their 
strivings to shatter the union of the believers, they 
neglected nothing.  They joined hands with every 
enemy of the Faith, became boon companions of all 
who betrayed it.  There was no mischief, no plot, no 
slander, no aspersion, that they would not allow 
 
+P177 
themselves, no individual so vile that they would 
not cleave to him.  
     And thus, with all His own ordeals and cares, and 
banished from His home, He Whom the world 
wronged devoted Himself to counselling and nurturing 
the people with the utmost loving-kindness, 
divinely admonishing them, leading and guiding 
them at all times to complete and utter steadfastness 
in the Cause of God.  
     From one direction He would ward off the 
assaults of the nations, from another He would hold 
back the people of hatred from tormenting the 
believers.  Now He would scatter the waverers' 
clouds of doubt, again He would demonstrate the 
truth of the clear and manifest Verses, and at all 
times and seasons He would guard the Cause of God 
with His very life, and protect its Law.  
     His fundamental purpose in enduring that continual 
toil and pain, and bearing those calamities, 
was to safeguard the divine and all-embracing 
Word, to shelter the tree of unity, to educate persons 
of capacity, to refine those who were pure in heart, 
and to transform the hearts of the receptive, to 
expound the mysteries of God and illumine the 
minds of the spiritual.  
     All praise be to &Baha'u'llah!  The meaning of 
those bounties became apparent and the splendour 
of those bestowals was made manifest:  that conclusive 
Text, the Will and Testament of &Abdu'l-Baha, 
was given us, and what had been hidden at the 
 
+P178 
beginning was made known at the end.  His infinite 
grace became clearly manifest, and with His own 
mighty pen He made a perfect Covenant, naming 
Shoghi Effendi the Chosen Branch and Guardian 
of the Faith.  Thus, by God's bounty, what had been 
a concealed mystery and a well-guarded secret, was 
at last made plain.  
     This greatest of bestowals came as a lightning-flash 
of glory to the righteous, but to those evil ones 
who broke the Covenant, it was the thunderbolt of 
God's avenging wrath.  
 
     55.  Although the ascension of the beloved 
Centre of the Covenant was the ultimate calamity, 
the severest of ordeals, and the fire of that bereavement 
consumed our hearts and souls, and there were  
no eyes but wept their tears of blood to mourn Him, 
no breast but uttered fiery sighs--still, God be 
praised, the Will and Testament of that Wellspring 
of bounty and grace, and the designation by Him of 
the Centre of the Faith and the Covenant, quieted 
our burning grief and stilled our sighing, and came 
as balm to our sorely-wounded hearts.  
     The power of the Faith prevailed, the awesome 
majesty of the Word of God flashed out, and day by 
day reveals in increasing measure its overpowering 
might.  
     And now, to offer gratitude befitting such a 
bounty, we must prepare ourselves, gird ourselves 
for service, and rise up and live in accordance with 
the instructions of the Blessed Beauty and the 
 
+P179 
counsels of &Abdu'l-Baha, for these are the life of 
the world and the salvation of its peoples.  Thus, 
from every direction, will the portals of happiness 
and spirituality open before us all.  
     The Chosen Branch, the Guardian of the Cause of 
God, Shoghi Effendi, because of the intense grief 
and suffering and pain inflicted by this terrible event, 
has desired to spend a period alone, in a quiet spot, 
where he can devote his time to prayer and supplication, 
and communion with God.  He, therefore, left 
us sometime ago, but our hopes are high that in a 
very short time he will come home to the Holy 
Land.  For the moment, then, this wronged and sad 
one has answered, however briefly, the letter from 
your distinguished Assembly.  
 
     56.  You have offered up thanks to the Lord for 
appointing the Centre of His Cause and the Guardian 
of His Covenant, and have voiced your gratitude 
and expressed your spiritual sentiments, for 
this favour and grace.  
     It is true, in all the world there could be no mercy 
greater than this, no bounty more abundant.  
     &Abdu'l-Baha, may our lives be sacrificed for His 
sacred dust, has bestowed on us a wondrous gift, a 
most great favour.  He has clearly shown us the 
highway of guidance and explicitly designated the 
Centre toward whom all the people of &Baha must 
turn, and with His own bounteous pen has written 
 
+P180 
down for us what will ensure prosperity and progress, 
and salvation and bliss, for evermore.  
     Now is the time to arise and serve with all our 
powers, that we may grow happier day by day, and 
fill our hearts with warmth and joy.  
 
     57.  The Ancient Beauty, the Most Great Name, 
has, through the splendours of His grace in this most 
glorious of all ages, made this world of dust to 
radiate light.  The loving counsels of &Abdu'l-Baha 
have turned the beloved of the Lord into signs and 
tokens of humility and lowliness.  He has taught 
them selflessness, and freedom from material 
things, and detachment from the world, and has 
enabled them to understand the verities of Heaven.  
     In that supernal realm we are all but motes; in the 
court of the Lord God's majesty we are but helpless 
shadows.  He is the Shelter for all; He is the Protector 
of all; He is the Helper of all; He is the Preserver of 
all.  Whensoever we look upon ourselves, we, one 
and all, despair; but He, with all His grace, His 
bestowals, His bounties, is the close Companion of 
each one.  
     It is certain that tests and trials are inseparable 
from this life and a vital requirement thereof, 
especially for the human race and above all for those 
who claim to have faith and love.  Only through 
trials can the genuine be known from the worthless, 
and purity from pollution, and the real from the 
false.  The meaning of the sacred verse:  `Do men 
 
+P181 
think when they say `We believe' they shall be let 
alone and not be put to proof?'+F1 prevails at all times 
and is applicable at every breath, and fire will only 
bring out the brightness of the gold.  
     So it is my hope that with lowliness and a contrite 
heart, with supplications and prayers, with good 
intentions and faithfulness, with purity of heart and 
adherence to the truth, with rising up to serve and 
with the blessings and confirmations of the Lord, we 
may come into a realm, and arrive at a condition, 
where we shall live under His overshadowing 
mercy, and His helping hand shall come to our aid 
and succour.  
 
     58.  After the construction of the &Bab's Shrine 
on Mount Carmel, it was the wish and intention of 
&Abdu'l-Baha--may our lives be sacrificed for His 
holy dust--to open a path that would lead directly 
from the Shrine to the German Avenue.  Time and 
again He referred to this project and explained how 
it should be built.  You are no doubt familiar with 
this matter.  However, in those days many obstacles 
stood in the way, preventing the execution of this 
important project.  Among them was a house  
located at the beginning of this path at the foot of the 
mountain, which belonged to one of the German 
settlers.  This house had become a serious barrier, 
inasmuch as the owner had turned down every offer 
for the purchase of the property.  The German 
 
+F1 &Qur'an 29:2.  
 
+P182 
community had adopted a policy in the administration 
of the real estate within the boundary of their 
settlement which required them not to sell any tract 
of land or any house within that area to outsiders, no 
matter how lucrative the payment might be.  This 
ruling was strictly observed by them and had 
developed into an insurmountable barrier.  Another 
obstacle was that the projected path would pass 
through tracts of land which belonged to different 
people, and some of them were unable to sell their 
property due to legal problems, while others deliberately 
would not sell since they had perceived that 
this path was exclusively intended for access to the 
&Baha'i Shrine and that the &Baha'is would eventually  
be compelled, no matter when, to pay an 
enormous sum for the acquisition of this land.  Thus 
immersed in the sea of visionary hopes and dreams 
they categorically refused to sell.  So days and nights, 
and months and years passed by until the hand of 
divine power wrought a change in the whole 
situation, and the truth of the words:  `He shall 
establish His ascendancy over His dominion as He 
pleaseth' was fulfilled; for not long afterwards this 
territory was occupied by the equitable Government 
of Great Britain, and the local authorities, acting 
according to their own judgement, decided that the 
existence of the above house in that locality was 
undesirable.  Therefore they demolished the house, 
cleared the site and carried away the stones.  Then the 
Municipal Engineer prepared a design for the path, 
emphasizing that the opening of that path to the 
 
+P183 
&Baha'i Shrine was imperative.  This design 
received the blessed attention of &Abdu'l-Baha Who 
graciously approved it and expressed His satisfaction 
and appreciation to the Municipal Engineer.  
Later on, with the aid of divine confirmations, 
enough land was purchased from the remaining 
tracts through which the path passed.  
 
     59.  At the Threshold of the Lord of Mercy we 
supplicate Him to grant perception and understanding 
to the ignorant, to awaken and bestow awareness 
upon those who are fast asleep and to give the 
eye of insight to the men of authority who conduct 
the affairs of the people, so that they may clearly 
distinguish the peace-maker from the mischief-maker, 
the faithful from the traitor, and the well-wisher 
from the ill-wisher.  
 
     60.  The adherents of the Faith of &Baha'u'llah 
have, under all circumstances throughout the past 
sixty years or more, clearly proved themselves to be 
the well-wishers of all governments and peoples and 
have demonstrated that they are lovers of peace, are 
sincere, trustworthy and devoted.  However, they 
often become the object of calumny and slander 
uttered by some foolish people.  Indeed, such has 
ever been the way of God.  
     From time immemorial even to this day the 
chosen ones of God have always been exposed to the 
 
+P184 
woes and sufferings that the disdainful have 
inflicted upon them.  They have been made the 
targets of the darts and spears of hatred and 
enmity that the heedless have unloosed upon 
them.  Yet it is clear and evident that the loved 
ones of God will always, with the whole affection 
of their hearts and souls, welcome every tribulation 
in the path of the peerless Beloved and will, 
with utmost joy and love, accept the pain of every 
grievous wound for the sake of the incomparable 
One.  Far from grieving or complaining, they offer 
praise and thanksgiving to Him Who is the 
Sovereign Lord of all.  They commit their affairs 
to the care of the Lord of all mankind and surrender 
everything to Him Whose power is irresistible.  
He is the Potent, the Powerful, the Avenger, 
the All-Compelling.  
 
     61.  Regarding the Centre of Sedition+F1 and his 
scrolls of doubt, this individual, for a period of 
thirty years, both within and without the Cause, 
was busy with his mischief-making, and planting 
his seeds of contention and dissension.  He had in 
mind but one concern, one single thought:  to 
create discord in the Faith.  All this is well known 
to everyone, it is clear as the noonday sun, and is 
set forth in the Writings of the Centre of the 
Covenant, including His Will and Testament, 
 
+F1 &Muhammad-'Ali.  
 
+P185 
where this person's evil intentions, satanic plots and 
diabolic acts are a matter of record, and there is no 
need to elaborate on them here.  
     So things were until recent times, when we were 
subjected to this direst of all ordeals.  Once again, the 
Centre of Sedition, believing that the field was his, 
and seizing the occasion, rose up and began to spread 
abroad his scrolls of doubt, heedless of the fact that 
the instructions and commandments of the Blessed 
Beauty, may His Name be glorified, and the counsels 
of &Abdu'l-Baha, may our souls be sacrificed 
for His meekness, had reinforced the base of the 
Cause, and firmly established the edifice of the 
Word of God, and They had, through God's favour 
and grace, drawn Their faithful loved ones into a 
realm where no power in all the world, nor the 
awesome majesty nor the onslaughts of the world's 
embattled armies, could so much as disturb the faith 
of a single &Baha'i child, nor make him to stray 
from the path that leads aright.  How much less 
could such as he affect those noble personages every 
one of whom is rooted firm in the love of God, and 
stands immovable as the high mountains!  
     God be praised, during all these long years, all 
this individual ever achieved was injury to himself, 
and the defeat of his plans, and the disappointment 
of his hopes.  Nor will he ever have anything 
more.  
     In recent times, especially, from whatever direction 
he mounted his attack, he discovered a solid 
barrier that proved impossible to assail, and found 
 
+P186 
his slings and arrows of doubt turned back against 
himself.  Thus were fulfilled the words of 
&Abdu'l-Baha in His Will and Testament, that `The 
Centre of Sedition was ... confounded in his 
craftiness...'  To whatsoever place this person 
addressed his evil treatises of doubt, these same 
treatises were sent straight back to him, some with a 
reply, some without, and thus he found it hopeless 
to make a breach in the Cause of God.  
 
     62.  Your letter has come, and I myself and the 
Holy Family were infinitely grieved to learn of the 
sufferings you have undergone, being made as you 
were the targets of such injustice, malevolence and 
aggression.  
     Since, however, you stood firm and steadfast and 
unchanging, as the arrows of tyranny came against 
you, and since this happened for the sake of the 
Blessed Beauty, and in the pathway of the One 
Beloved, it behoves you to thank God and praise 
Him, for having singled you out for this great 
bounty.  
     For this clamour and uproar, the blows, the 
abuse, the taunts, the curses, when borne for love of 
the All-Bounteous Lord, are but festive days and 
times for jubilee.  
     God be praised, you have been given a drop out of 
that ocean of tribulations that swept across the 
Exalted One and the Beauty of the All-Glorious, 
 
+P187 
you were granted a droplet out of the seas of 
calamity that engulfed &Abdu'l-Baha.  
     The evil ones did not destroy the &Mashriqu'l-Adhkar, 
nor will they ever; it was their 
own house that they brought down in ruins and 
gave to the winds.  They did not burn down the 
school, they put the flame to their own roots.  
     Lofty is the structure of the House of Worship; it 
is certain that you will build a new and greater one.  
Be you confident of the bestowals of the Blessed 
Beauty and the gifts and blessings of &Abdu'l-Baha.  
 
     63.  The sad news about the death of your 
husband has just reached us; we fully sympathize 
with you.  When one meditates over the general 
trend of affairs and drinks deep from the fountain of 
the teachings of &Baha'u'llah and &Abdu'l-Baha he 
is bound to come to the conclusion that this world is 
no world of attachment; nay rather it constantly 
gives us the lesson of keeping aloof as far as possible 
from it.  This point becomes clearer now that the 
physical body of the Master is taken away from us.  
We should really congratulate the departing ones 
because they leave this world of pains and troubles 
and enter the eternal bliss of being with holy spirits 
which have been working to detach humanity from 
the ephemeral world.  
 
     64.  The letter you have written was received 
with the utmost joy for it was to us not only a 
 
+P188 
message of love and unity but a message of humble 
devotion and servitude at the divine Threshold.  It 
was not only the cause of comfort to our broken 
hearts but also a divine balm to our souls and we are 
sure that the spirit which that letter bore is the one 
which reigns in the heart of each single member of 
that united assembly.  
     You have written that your number is small; but it  
is decidedly true that it is not numbers that count, it 
is, rather, the sincerity and devotion of the hearts.  It 
is the heart that, subduing within itself all earthly 
cares, shines forth resplendent in the realm of love 
and selflessness, attracting to itself the souls of the 
weary and depressed, soothing their wounds with 
the balm of this Message.  This new Revelation has 
in reality been the water of life unto the thirsty, a sea 
of knowledge unto the searcher, a message of 
condolence to the weary and a new spirit and life to 
the whole world.  And now it remains that we, the 
humble servants of our Lord should be confirmed, 
through our own effort and through His bounty to 
diffuse this light everywhere and to carry this Glad 
Tidings to every cottage and princely home.  
     We ask God to make each one of that assembly a 
herald of love wherever he may go and that he may 
be accepted as a humble servant of His Lord.  
 
     65.  All praise be unto the Court of Holiness, 
that God has drawn certain blessed souls, entities 
 
+P189 
delicate and pure, unto a realm where they have no 
desire save the good-pleasure of the Beloved; 
where, in the pathway of the Ancient Beauty and 
their devotion to &Abdu'l-Baha, they yearn for 
naught and have no other aim but to offer themselves 
up, to serve, to guide humankind, and to 
wander, homeless and portionless, over the earth.  
     Such promptings derive from the blessings and 
confirmations of the &Abha Kingdom.  Such 
impulses come when a soul is cleaving fast to the 
eternal world....  As to your not being present in 
the Holy Land on the occasion of the anniversary of 
His Passing, nor able to take part with these 
bereaved ones in our mourning for the setting of the 
Sun of the Covenant:  be assured that in that dread 
hour, that calamitous time, the souls of the people of 
&Baha were, one and all, circumambulating His 
resplendent resting-place, and the lamentation and 
wailing of this faithful band were continually rising 
up to the heavenly Throne.  And that immaculate 
Spirit must have gazed down upon them from the 
realms on high, and bestowed upon them all His 
grace, and grieved over the grieving of them all, and 
consoled and soothed them all, and supplicated, 
even as He now supplicates, His Supreme Companion 
to grant unto every one of them fervour and 
joy, and ardour and bliss, and detachment from the 
world, and steadfast faith.  
     It is our hope that we all shall be blessed and 
confirmed in whatever befits this day.  
 
+P190 
     66.  It has been demonstrated time and time 
again that whatever comes to pass only enhances the 
glory of God's Faith, and further proclaims His 
Word.  This time it will be the same.  
     However savage this tempest of trials, however 
battered by surging waves the Ark of the Faith may 
be, still, the Divine Mariner has taken into His own 
two powerful hands the helm of this Ark--and He, 
steady, calm and able, and endowed with all authority 
and might, is steering its course, and will bring it 
at last safe and secure to its glorious haven.  Of this 
there can be no question.  
     You have sent us the good news that the believers 
are arising to serve the Faith and are loyal and 
devoted to the Chosen Branch, the Guardian of the 
Cause of God.  This news rejoiced our hearts.  
     We pray for you most humbly at the Holy 
Thresholds, and beg of God to grant His ever-increasing 
confirmations and blessings to all of you.  
 
     67.  The cheque for the amount of two hundred 
pounds that you had sent as your contribution to the 
Temple Fund has been received and duly forwarded 
to Chicago.  Behold what a pervasive power this 
evidence of co-operation and support, this spirit of 
selfless consecration is bound to release in the realm 
of the heart and spirit.  Consider to what extent the 
world of human virtues will be enriched and 
 
+P191 
adorned by this munificent act, and how glorious 
the light that this manifestation of unity and solidarity 
is likely to shed upon all regions.  Indeed, this 
mighty endeavour has been accomplished despite 
the adverse economic situation in Persia, where the 
evidences of hardship, privation and depression are 
clearly apparent.  But since the object of this noble 
enterprise and praiseworthy effort is to enhance the 
glory of the Cause of God, therefore it will unfailingly 
attract divine blessings and bounty.  
 
     68.  It is clear and evident that the body of 
mankind in this day stands in dire need of such 
members and organs as are capable, useful and 
active, so that their movements and activities, their 
bearing and behaviour, their tender feelings, lofty 
sentiments and noble intentions may at all times 
reflect heavenly virtues and perfections and become 
the expressions of divine attributes and saintly 
characteristics, thus breathing a new life and spirit 
into all the dwellers of the world and causing the 
inner ties and spiritual relationships to be fostered 
and fortified in all fields of human endeavour.  
 
     69.  We beseech God--exalted be His glory--to 
grant awareness and insight to the men of wisdom as 
well as to those who hold in their grasp the reins of 
 
+P192 
power in Persia, that they may be able to distinguish 
the right way from the crooked and devious path 
and may clearly discern the well-wisher from the 
ill-wisher with a true and genuine sense of discrimination.  
     As regards the amelioration of your own affairs, 
let us entrust the whole matter to the Blessed 
Beauty.  He is the best Benefactor, unsurpassed in 
His bounty.  
 
     70.  Your letter of 12th October 1922 is just 
received and refreshed in our memory the many 
beautiful days that you spent here when the Beloved 
Lord, &Abdu'l-Baha, was still on this earth.  Those 
are days that many events of history could never 
efface from the hearts, nay rather the further we go 
in the scale of life the deeper become the impressions 
thereof within the meshes of our inner life.  
     I read your letter with full attention and in the 
course of the reading the words of the Master were 
ringing in my ear; words that have descended like 
showers on all souls and hearts that could understand.  
Now is the time when we should forget 
everything and concentrate our thoughts upon the 
advancement of the Cause of God and strive day and 
night that the principles and teachings of His 
Holiness &Baha'u'llah and the words of the Master 
may find full expression in the hearts of the true 
friends.  
 
+P193 
     When I think over the history of the Cause and the 
many difficulties that all its promoters have undergone 
I unhesitatingly am convinced that the sincere 
friends who have watched the events will not lose a 
moment but will with all their hearts and souls 
sacrifice everything of worth in order to realize that 
for which the Divine plan has been working.  
     Have all your thoughts directed to the Master and 
heed not what you hear from here or there.  We hope 
that soon beloved Shoghi Effendi will come back to 
Haifa and things will resume their natural course.  
What we need today is complete unity amongst the 
friends and this will attract the Divine assistance 
from the &Abha Kingdom.  
     All the members of the Holy family remember 
you and pray for you at the Holy Shrines.  We hope  
to hear much good news from you; this will be 
the Cause of the Master's happiness as He always 
wished to hear from you good news.  Convey my 
&Abha greetings to all the brothers and sisters there.  
 
     71.  All praise to the beloved &Abha Beauty, 
that those nightingales of the gardens of knowledge, 
those doves of the fragrant bowers of certitude, are 
singing the holy verses on the boughs of grace and 
bounty, celebrating the praise and glory of the Lord 
of the worlds, chanting His holy words, carolling to 
Him hymns of love, and extolling and lauding His 
blessed name.  
 
+P194 
     God be thanked, the spirits rejoice, the hearts are 
full of fervour, the souls are held spellbound by that 
shining Face.  The Blessed Beauty's sea of bounty is 
rolling up great waves; He is casting the rays of His 
grace over the world and all its peoples; the clouds of 
His liberal bestowals are showering down, the sun 
of His generosity is shining bright.  
     In its every aspect, this noblest of Dispensations 
and greatest of eras is something set apart, for it is 
most exalted, most glorious, and distinguished 
from the past.  In no wise is it to be compared with 
the ages gone before.  So plainly, in this mighty day, 
have the mysteries been laid bare, that to the 
perceptive and the initiated and those who have 
attained the knowledge of divine secrets, they 
appear as tangible realities.  In this new Day the stars 
of allusions and hints have fallen, for the Sun of 
explicit texts has risen, and the Moon of expositions 
and interpretations has shone above all horizons.  
     As expressly stated in the Holy Text, a specific 
Centre has been give us.  With His own pen has 
&Abdu'l-Baha, the Centre of the Covenant, selected 
and appointed Shoghi Effendi, the Chosen Branch, 
the Guardian of the Cause of God, the interpreter of 
the Book of God, so that the highway of divine 
guidance has been clearly marked out and lighted up 
for all the ages to come.  This bounty is one of the 
distinguishing features of this mightiest of Dispensations, 
a special grace allotted to this age.  
     It is my hope that we all shall arise, thus to prove 
our gratitude for all these rich bestowals and gifts, 
 
+P195 
and serve the Cause of God and spread the holy 
Teachings and speedily carry out the instructions of 
&Abdu'l-Baha--so that day by day the limits of the 
Faith will be extended, and the seekers will find their 
goal, and the lovers reach the beauty of the Beloved, 
and the thirsty come to crystal waters, and spiritual 
joys embrace mankind, and every heart be gladdened.  
 
     72.  Your kind and loving letter written with an 
unbounded love and a sincere devotion for our 
beloved &Abdu'l-Baha and His Cause has been duly 
received.  It spoke of that painful story where earthly 
cares and physical illnesses have prevented blessed 
souls, so overflowing with love, to shine in this dark 
and dismal world.  Nevertheless, dear sister, rest 
assured and never be sorrowful.  It is in one of the 
foremost Tablets of &Baha'u'llah that He says:  
`Verily God hath made adversity as a morning dew 
upon His green pasture, and a wick for His lamp 
which lighteth earth and heaven.'  Meaning thereby 
that physical illnesses and misfortunes certainly 
make a person nearer and nearer to his Lord.  Why 
then should we sorrow over earthly hindrances 
when we have done what we possibly could, and 
when we are sure that this, our little service, will 
certainly be acceptable in His Sight?  
     I was very glad to know that even with all these 
hindrances you could give the Message to certain 
souls and I eagerly hope that they in turn will acquire 
 
+P196 
the love with which you taught them and will never 
stop giving this Glad Tidings to every soul they 
meet.  
 
     73.  Praise be to God that through the gracious 
assistance of the &Abha Kingdom those devoted 
friends have been enabled to achieve that which 
befits the glory of the Cause of God and the 
protection of the community of the followers of 
&Baha'u'llah.  This is none other than to foster unity 
and fellowship under all conditions, to strengthen 
the bonds of harmony and concord in all things, and 
to avoid political matters.  It is particularly important 
to refrain from making unfavourable remarks 
or statements concerning the friends and the loved 
ones of God, inasmuch as any expression of grievance, 
of complaint or backbiting is incompatible 
with the requirements of unity and harmony and 
would dampen the spirit of love, fellowship and 
nobility.  Therefore it is incumbent upon the members 
of the exalted Spiritual Assembly to exercise the 
utmost care with firm determination and not to 
allow the doors of complaint and grievance to be 
opened, or permit any of the friends to indulge in 
censure and backbiting.  Whoever sets himself to do 
so, even though he be the very embodiment of the 
Holy Spirit, should realize that such behaviour 
would create disruption among the people of &Baha 
and would cause the standard of sedition to be 
raised.  
 
+P197 
     In these days when the peoples of the world are 
thirsting for the teachings of the &Abha Beauty
--teachings that provide the incomparable, life-giving 
waters of immortality--when we &Baha'is 
have pledged ourselves to proffer these living waters 
to all mankind and are known to be prepared to 
endure every suffering and tribulation, how pitiful it 
would be if, despite all this, we were to neglect our 
binding obligations and responsibilities and to 
occupy ourselves with disagreeable discussions that 
provoke irritation and distress and to turn our 
attention to matters that lead to ill-feeling, to 
despondency and unhappiness and reduce the penetrating 
influence of the Word of God.  
 
     74.  Your letter was received and its contents 
were perused.  The scrolls you had enclosed were 
clearly understood.  They are of no consequence 
whatsoever, nor are they worthy of any attention.  
The letter you have written in reply, although brief, 
is adequate and conclusive.  What you have written, 
even as the tablet of your heart, is illumined with the 
light of constancy and steadfastness, and indicates 
your firmness and determination in upholding His 
Covenant.  In truth this is the essential thing.  
     Following the ascension of &Abdu'l-Baha--may 
our lives be offered up for His holy Dust--the 
Covenant-breakers, using every means in their 
power, busied themselves in spreading false reports.  
No calumny, no slander did they spare.  Likewise, 
 
+P198 
after the ascension of the Ancient Beauty, the Most 
Great Name--may the life of all created things be 
sacrificed for His holy dust--the people of doubt 
and hesitation seized upon every means and arose to 
destroy the edifice of the Cause, to profane the 
honour of the Lord and to violate His Covenant.  
Yet, during all this time and under all conditions 
these bereaved and oppressed ones, with faces set 
towards His luminous Threshold, held fast to the 
cord of patience and resignation, engaged themselves 
in offering fervent prayers and supplications 
and committed all their affairs to the care of the 
Blessed Beauty.  For in truth He is the Refuge of the 
oppressed and the unfailing Comforter of the 
anguished, whereas the Centre of Sedition and his 
following have gathered no fruit from their rebellious 
acts save despondency and utter loss.  
 
     75.  It was sometime ago that I received your 
kind and encouraging letter through your honourable 
secretary.  And although in a joyless world, the 
love and unity of the friends in Yonkers imparted 
the utmost joy to this bereaved family.  Great indeed 
as was my desire to reciprocate those kind sentiments 
so beautifully expressed in your letter, it is 
truly unfortunate that I should have delayed the 
answer so long.  
     For the last few weeks we have all been happy 
over Shoghi Effendi's safe arrival and we really miss 
all our beloved brethren and sisters in this little town 
 
+P199 
of Haifa.  Last night's sad and solemn occasion was 
passed in prayer and meditation.  The loved ones of 
that dear Master had all gathered from the countries 
near by to join His family in commemorating the 
anniversary of His passing.  In a night of utter silence 
with the rich moonlight flooding the precincts of 
His Shrine, the humble devotees of &Abdu'l-Baha 
had gathered in a little group just near His Tomb; 
and in prayerful supplications they outpoured with 
their tears the woe of their hearts refilling them again 
with faith in His loving-kindness and high hopes for 
the future.  
     On such an occasion, dear friends, what better can 
we do than to realize one and all that our dear Master 
has for ever gone from our midst, and yet with the 
surest faith in His tender Spirit we should arise with 
one accord, aided and guided by our beloved 
Guardian, to dedicate our lives to the Cause for 
which He was a living sacrifice.  Deep and painful as 
that thought may be, it should fill our hearts with 
faith in the Lord.  Then and only then can we lead His 
Cause into a glorious victory.  
 
     76.  You quite well realize, I presume, that 
Shoghi Effendi has always cherished the fondest 
hopes for your services to the Cause of 
&Abdu'l-Baha, and I am sure that your achievements 
will be great, shining brilliantly as a star.  The 
field is world-wide and with but a noble spirit and 
 
+P200 
faith in the Lord we can carry to every home this 
Message of peace and brotherhood.  
 
     77.  The Pen of the divine Ordainer has so 
decreed that this house of sorrows should be encompassed 
by unending calamity and pain.  Even before 
the dark clouds of one disaster are scattered, the 
lowering storm of yet a new grief takes over, casting 
its darkness across the inner skies of the heart.  Such 
has been the lot of this broken-hearted one and the 
other leaves of the Holy Tree, from earliest childhood 
until this hour; such has been the fruit we have 
plucked from the tree of our lives.  
     We can see before us the Holy Shrine where lies 
the blessed, riddled body of the Primal Point, and 
memory of the delicate and tender remains of other 
martyrs passes before our eyes.  The remembrance 
of the Ancient Beauty's dungeon in &Tihran, and 
that most noble Being's exile from city to city, 
culminating in the murk of the &Akka prison, is 
engraved upon our minds.  The calamities, the 
massive afflictions, endured by &Abdu'l-Baha 
throughout His entire life, and His wailing at the 
break of dawn are recorded for all time upon the 
tablets of the soul, and those cries that rose out of His 
luminous heart will linger on in the mind's ear.  
     It is clear, too, how the most dire of all ordeals, the 
ascension of the divine Beauty, made the structure 
of our existence to topple down; how being 
deprived of Him consumed the very limbs of our 
 
+P201 
bodies.  And when our fiery tears brought on by this 
were not yet dried, and the heart's wound had not 
healed over, then the bearer of God's decree called us 
to yet another anguish, that dire calamity, that 
terrible disaster, the passing of &Abdu'l-Baha.  Then 
were we, the sorrow-stricken, thrust again into the 
fires of separation, and the pitch darkness of deep 
mourning enshrouded this family.  
     Beloved friends of the Blessed Beauty:  what could 
have been the purpose of those holy Beings in 
enduring such agonies?  Why did those precious and 
luminous souls accept all that hardship and pain?  
Any just observer will acknowledge that They had 
no other end in view but to better the human race, 
and cleanse it from the imperfections of this contingent 
world, and see to its advancement, and endow 
all peoples with the wondrous virtues of humankind.  
Thanks be to God's bounties, the signs of such 
perfections, the lights of such bestowals, have 
become clearly manifest throughout the world.  The 
tree of His Cause grows ever more massive, day by 
day, and heavier with fruit, and from moment to 
moment taller, and it shall cast its wondrous shade 
over all who seek its shelter.  
     The fruit of these boughs is plain to see:  this Tree 
will bear sincere love and true friendship, traits of 
Heaven and qualities of God.  This immortal Tree 
will yield kindness and humbleness, learning and 
wisdom, and the divine virtues.  
     The aim of those blessed Ones, then, those 
Temples of holiness, in enduring, over a whole 
 
+P202 
century, all Their trials and tribulations, was to 
firmly establish a way of life whereby human 
character in general and that of God's loved ones in 
particular would be rectified.  To such a degree must 
this come to pass that from their very breathing and 
walking, their rising up, sitting still, moving about, 
their every act--it can clearly be seen that they are 
different from those others who are neglectful of 
God and veiled away from Him:  that they can be 
distinguished from the others as easily as you can tell 
the day-star from the dark.  
     Although through the mighty influence of the 
Word of God the inner self of each of the friends and 
of those who are steadfast in His perfect Covenant is 
held fast by the magnet of His love, and they are 
known in every land by this distinguishing characteristic 
and are everywhere illumined by this light
--still the thing to remember is this:  until the 
accidental events which arise from the world of the 
trivial and the personal are completely lost in the 
world of the universal, that is, in the bounties and 
attributes of the Merciful--that true and primal 
glory can never be revealed as it merits, nor ever 
show forth the beauty with which it is endowed.  Let 
every steadfast soul ever bear in mind the anguish of 
those holy Beings and the trials They endured, and 
because of the wrongs They suffered, and the blood 
of the martyrs in His path, out of pity for what has 
befallen God's Cause and His Law, put the good of 
the Cause before any other good, and its honour 
before any other.  Let him face every problem, 
 
+P203 
whether minor or major, with goodwill and purity 
of motive.  Let him not make of God's Law, created 
as it was to bring about unity and love, a means of 
discord.  &Abdu'l-Baha says:  `If religion be the cause 
of disunity, then irreligion is surely to be preferred.'  
     Today as well, the Chosen Branch, the Guardian 
of the Cause of God, is at all times waiting expectantly
--and indeed, it is the most cherished desire of 
his heart--to see this reality, this proof of serious 
effort, this feature that distinguishes the &Baha'is 
from all others, clearly and unmistakably revealed in 
the life of every single &Baha'i.  
     As is well known, at the time when the Day-Star 
of the Covenant did set, the Chosen Branch was 
absent from this luminous Spot, and when he 
received the terrifying news of that direst of ordeals, 
he was overcome by a grief such as no words can 
describe.  Broken in health, his heart brimful of 
sorrows, he returned to this blessed place.  At that 
time the unfaithful, with extreme perversity and at a 
high point of rebellion, were openly and secretly 
spreading their calumnies, and this behaviour of 
theirs added still more to the Guardian's burden of 
grief.  He left, therefore, and spent some time in 
seclusion, carrying on the affairs of the Faith, seeing 
to its interests and its institutions, communing with 
God, and imploring His help.  
     The Lord be praised, because of the divine 
bounties, during his absence there were such evidences 
of staunchness and loyalty and high resolve 
and unity and love and fervour among all the 
 
+P204 
friends, men and women alike, both of East and 
West, and in the Holy Land--that on the one hand 
the Centre of Sedition, and the arrogant and the 
malevolent, found themselves utterly defeated, their 
hopes of making a breach in the Faith bitterly 
disappointed, while on the other, the exemplary 
quality and sound condition of the believers, as 
referred to, was a comfort to the Guardian's heart.  
Thus he was able, happy now and in perfect health, 
to return to this Spot, and to carry out his sacred 
obligations.  
     By this time a great many matters of the utmost 
importance had accumulated, and letters were 
coming in continuously from individuals and communities, 
which for lack of time could not be dealt 
with individually.  The Guardian therefore dispensed 
with replies to individuals and sent out 
general letters to the Spiritual Assemblies, in which 
in the clearest terms he set forth the obligations 
devolving upon all, and gave the friends his instructions.  
These basic spiritual guidelines were received 
by the believers with great delight and the utmost 
joy; they immediately put them into practice, and 
thus the preliminary steps were taken, and in every 
area progress was being made to an ever-increasing 
degree.  
     Now, however, as the letters continually 
streamed in, the contents of one or two of them 
showed that among some of the believers a certain 
ill-feeling had arisen, and further, that some did not, 
as they should, respect and duly defer to their 
 
+P205 
Spiritual Assembly.  It is obvious what an effect this 
kind of news, whether implied or clearly stated, had 
on the Guardian's heart, and what an unfavourable 
reaction it produced.  The result was that for the 
second time his health failed, and then, at the 
importunity of this evanescent soul and the urgent 
entreaties of the Holy Household and the repeated 
appeals of those in close association with him--he 
went away last summer.  
     This proved of the greatest benefit to him, and his 
health was completely restored.  And then, one 
following the next, there came in good reports from 
Spiritual Assemblies everywhere, and other gatherings 
and groups, and also individuals, and this 
brought him great joy; so much so that following 
that summer's journey, out of his intense love for 
the believers, he began to correspond even with 
individuals; and continually, in the various meetings, 
he would express his satisfaction with and 
praise of all the servants of the Blessed Beauty's 
Threshold and the loyal friends of &Abdu'l-Baha.  
     Alas, however, once again in some communities, 
he noted from certain letters an absence of spirituality 
and good-fellowship among some of the friends, 
and a lack of respect among some for their Assemblies.  
Once more, as a result of this, his heart was 
filled with sorrow and once again he decided on 
departure.  This lowly maidservant and the other 
members of the Household and all the Holy Leaves 
did all we could to blot away this grief from his 
radiant spirit.  When in his presence, we would bring 
 
+P206 
up all the good news that by the grace of God 
continued to pour in, and to speak of the staunchness, 
the loyalty, the love, the sacrifices of the 
believers both of East and West.  We begged him to 
reconsider his decision--but to no avail.  
     He told us:  `My heart is sensitive.  Just as I feel the 
ill-feeling that exists between individuals, and am 
injured by it, so too do I treasure the excellent 
qualities of the believers; indeed, I hold these dearer 
than words can tell.  After that most dread ordeal, 
the one and only solace of my heart was the loyalty, 
the staunchness, the love of the friends for the 
Blessed Beauty and for &Abdu'l-Baha.  Nothing can 
ever detract from the value of such excellent qualities, 
and I am deeply grateful to all the friends, men 
and women alike, for this.  And yet, this love of 
theirs, with all its fervour, can never, by itself, bring 
the Ark of the Faith to the longed-for shore.  It can 
never prove the claims of the people of &Baha to the 
people of the world.  To safeguard the religion of 
God and reinforce its power, the friends must make 
use of effective means:  their love must be so great 
that they worship one another, and shut any mutual 
ill-feeling out of their hearts.  
      `If, for example, the &non-Baha'is should ask the 
friends, "What differentiates you from all the rest?", 
and if, to this, the friends answer, "In the pathway of 
our love for the Centre of our Faith, we would 
sacrifice our lives and possessions," those of the 
civilized world would never be content with such a 
 
+P207 
reply.  They would merely say:  "Your love, your 
sacrifice for a single individual cannot possibly serve 
as a remedy for the chronic ills which plague society 
today."  If the friends then answer:  "Our religion 
provides principles and moral teachings whose 
value the wisest of the day cannot deny," this will be 
the response:  "Noble principles and teachings will 
produce an effect on human character, and heal the 
mortal sicknesses which afflict society, only at such 
time when those who claim to believe in and support 
them are themselves the first to act upon them, and 
to demonstrate and incorporate the value and the 
benefits of them in their own everyday transactions 
and lives."  Unless this comes about, there is nothing 
to distinguish the &Baha'is from the rest.'  
     He also told us:  `The people of the world are 
carefully watching the &Baha'is today, and 
minutely observing them.  The believers must make 
every effort, and take the utmost care to ward off 
and remove any feelings of estrangement, and 
consider themselves duty-bound to comply with the 
decisions of their Spiritual Assemblies.  To the same 
degree that ill-feeling among some of the believers 
has cast its shadow on my heart, to that same degree 
will my heart reflect their mutual agreement, understanding 
and loving affection, and their deference to 
the authority of their Spiritual Assemblies.  
And whenever I shall feel such lights reflected, 
I will at once return to the Holy Land and engage 
in the fulfilment of my sacred obligations.  
 
+P208 
Convey this message of mine to all the friends.'  
     It is now two weeks since he made this touching 
statement and left the Holy Land.  
     O dearly-loved ones of &Abdu'l-Baha!  We know 
from His sacred Will that we must `Take the greatest 
care of Shoghi Effendi ... that no dust of despondency 
and sorrow may stain his radiant nature' and 
that the tree of his spiritual being may bear fruit.  We 
must ever keep this in mind, and from hour to hour 
we must develop our heedfulness, our love and 
affection, our sagacity and magnanimity.  
     It is the hope of this writer that the friends of God 
will put forth such efforts, and will so radiate their 
love for Him, as to light up the world; a love that 
will make the heart of the Guardian leap for joy, 
and then, God willing, he will soon come back 
again, so that before I close my eyes upon this life, 
the separation I endure will be over, and I can bid 
you all farewell with a happy heart.  
    My only joy, in these my numbered days, and the 
joy of the Master's consort, rests in the hands of 
those well-loved friends of &Abdu'l-Baha.  
     Upon you be the glory of the All-Glorious.  
 
     78.  `O God, My God!  Thou hast lighted the lamp of 
Thy Cause with the oil of wisdom; protect it from contrary 
winds.  The lamp is Thine and the glass is Thine, and all 
things in the heavens and on earth are in the grasp of Thy 
power.'+F1 
 
+F1 &Baha'u'llah, Epistle to the Son of the Wolf, p. 104.  
 
+P209 
     O servants of the &Abha Beauty's sacred 
Threshold, O beloved friends of &Abdu'l-Baha!  
     It is well known that from the earliest dawning of 
the Sun of Revelation, until the setting of the holy 
Covenant's Orb, the Ark of the Faith has continuously 
been battered by great waves of affliction, 
and beaten by calamity's storms.  Tempest and 
whirlwind have ever assailed this holy Tree.  
     Still, the exalted Star has continued on its destined 
journey, and despite the piled-up clouds of hate and 
error, its rays of grace have illumined the whole 
earth.  
     The Ark of Salvation was made the safe refuge of 
the righteous, and the holy Tree was hung with 
bright, immortal fruit, so that the honeyed yield of 
the love of God is sweet on the lips of His people.  
Out of the grace of the Blessed Beauty, eyes began 
to see, and ears to hear, and through the bounty of 
&Abdu'l-Baha the spirits turned vigilant, and souls 
awoke, and to the hearts were divine mysteries 
confided, and individuals became day-springs of 
light.  
     And for ever and ever, time without end, the 
glance of God's bounty and bestowal is, from the 
hidden world above, unceasingly cast down, and He 
watches over us with favour and grace.  It behoves 
us, then, to offer up thanks with every breath, and to 
be blissful at all times.  
     Although the towering citadel of God's Cause is 
upraised on foundations of iron, and His Word is 
founded on authority and power, and the loyal and 
 
+P210 
firm in His Covenant, through the blessings of the 
&Abha Paradise, stand immovable as the mountains, 
and are fast-rooted in their love--still, the hurricanes 
of tests are mighty as well, and from every side 
comes the thundering roar of violent commotions 
and bitter trials.  From these, at every moment each 
one of us should beg of God to defend and protect 
us.  
     Let us call to mind the clear statements and the 
warnings revealed by the Blessed Beauty, and the 
explanations and commentaries of &Abdu'l-Baha, 
particularly as found in His Will and Testament.  
This Testament was the last song of that Dove of the 
Rose-garden of Eternity, and He sang it on the 
branch of the Tree of bestowal and grace.  It was His 
principal gift, indeed the greatest of all splendours 
that radiated forth from that Day-Star of bounty, 
out of the firmament of His bestowals.  This Testament 
was the strong barricade built by the blessed 
hands of that wronged, that peerless One, to protect 
the garden of God's Faith.  It was the mighty 
stronghold circling the edifice of the Law of God.  
This was an overflowing treasure which the Beloved 
freely gave, a goodly and precious legacy, left by 
Him to the people of &Baha.  In all the world, no gift   
could equal this; no dazzling gem could rival such a  
precious pearl.  
     With His own pen, He designated as Guardian of 
the Cause of God, Shoghi Effendi Rabbani, the 
Chosen Branch, and made him the `blest and sacred 
bough that hath branched out from the Twin Holy 
 
+P211 
Trees,' to be the one to whom all must turn, the 
centre and focus of all on earth.  
     In unmistakable terms did He set forth the 
obligations and elucidated the nature of the institutions  
of God's Holy Faith.  He laid hold of discord's 
tree and brought it down.  He for ever shut the door 
on conflicting interpretations and views.  With every 
breath ought we to offer praise and thanks to the 
God of Grace for this bestowal.  It is incumbent upon 
us to read and meditate on the contents of the Will 
and Testament at all times, and implore God at His 
Holy Threshold that He will aid us to carry out 
whatsoever it ordains.  
     A few days ago I sent out a general letter.  A 
detailed, and recent, letter from the Guardian to all 
the people of &Baha was likewise sent out, and it is 
certain that you will be reading it; it is essential to 
circulate it among all the friends.  What I mean is, 
that because of my great and spiritual love for you, 
the steadfast lovers of God and His Covenant, I have 
now set about writing this present letter as well.  
     I would like to remind the friends of these words 
from &Abdu'l-Baha's Will and Testament, as written 
down by His pen of bounty:  `No doubt every 
vainglorious one that purposeth dissension and 
discord will not openly declare his evil purposes, 
nay rather, even as impure gold, would he seize 
upon divers measures and various pretexts that he 
may separate the gathering of the people of &Baha.'  
     In another Tablet He calls on us to understand the 
intent of every individual by the course of his 
 
+P212 
speech, and to see through his purpose.  And from 
the Blessed Beauty:  `Place not your trust in every 
new arrival, and believe not every speaker.'  
     Over and over, in countless Tablets, do we find 
the like of these precepts.  It is obvious that the 
purpose behind them is to awaken and warn the 
people of &Baha, so that the mighty citadel of the 
Cause will remain safe and secure from the plottings 
of those with evil intent, and the bright lamp of His 
Word will be shielded from the contrary winds 
unloosed by those who follow their evil passions 
and corrupt desires.  
     It is irrevocably decreed that whatsoever has been 
revealed and written down by the Supreme Pen and 
the holy hand of &Abdu'l-Baha will come to pass 
and be fully realized in this world, wherefore does it 
behove the people of &Baha, the souls attracted to 
His Splendour, to become all eyes and ears, and to be 
in body and soul and limbs and members all sagacity 
and prudence.  Addressing the believers, Christ tells 
them:  `Be ye harmless as the submissive dove, and 
wise as the serpent.'+F1 
     In this momentous matter there must be no laxity, 
no inattention, for a whisper might become an axe 
laid to the root of the Tree of the Faith--a word from 
an ambitious soul could be a spark tossed into the 
harvest of the people of &Baha.  We take refuge with 
God!  May He guard us ever, from the recklessness 
of the insistent self.  
     For the harbouring of an evil purpose is a disease 
 
+F1 cf. Matthew 10:16.  
 
+P213 
which shuts out the individual from all the blessings 
of Heaven, and casts him deep into the pit of 
perdition, of utter ruin.  The point to make is that 
anyone, high or low, rich or poor, learned or 
unlettered, although to all appearances he may be 
a jewel among men, and the fine flower of all that 
is best--if he gives utterance to some pronouncement 
or speaks some word from which can be  
detected the scent of self-worship, or a malicious 
and evil purpose, his aim is to disintegrate the 
Word of God and disperse the gathering of the 
people of &Baha.  From such individuals it is a  
solemn obligation to turn away; it is an inescapable 
duty to pay no heed whatever to their claims.  
     The clear promises of God, both His tidings of 
joy and His warnings, are being fulfilled, and it is 
inevitable that just as the sweet musk-laden winds 
of the &Abha Paradise are beginning to blow, and 
the flames of God's love to spread, so too must 
wintry blasts and icy breaths begin to fill the air.  
You must therefore exert superhuman powers to 
guard the Cause of God, and beg humbly and 
with a contrite heart for help from the Kingdom 
on High.  
     Although up to now, because of the dictates of 
wisdom, the Will and Testament has not been in 
general circulation, and has been entrusted only to 
the Spiritual Assemblies of the various countries, 
at this time a photocopy has been made from the 
Master's original Text, which is in His own hand, 
and it will soon be sent out, to increase the spiritual 
 
+P214 
joy of you who are essences of loyalty and trust, 
that every individual believer, every steadfast one in 
the Covenant who so desires, may read it and make a 
copy of it.  Upon you be the Glory of the All-Glorious.  
 
     79.  The tongue of this lowly and grief-stricken 
maidservant is powerless to praise those loved ones 
of God, and the words uttered by her are wholly 
inadequate to pay a worthy tribute to the staunch 
firmness and constancy, to the spirit of love, enthusiasm 
and devotion that those servants of the 
Kingdom of God are now manifesting.  
     Praise be to God that through the unfailing grace 
of the Beauty of the All-Glorious and the manifold 
blessings of &Abdu'l-Baha each one of them is 
radiant as a star and shining like the moon in the 
plenitude of its splendour.  That glorious Being, the 
incomparable Best-Beloved, graciously caused 
every one of His true servants to become as a 
brilliant lamp; while &Abdu'l-Baha, that matchless 
Beloved, transmuted the hearts of all those who 
stand unswervingly firm in His Covenant and 
Testament into a garden of roses--a garden embellished 
with the flowers of true knowledge, faith and 
assurance.  Such evidences of divine bounty call for 
thanksgiving, and in appreciation for this heavenly 
grace and mercy it is essential to yield praise and 
adoration to the Peerless Lord.  
 
+P215 
     Although the leaflets prepared by that faithless 
person,+F1 teeming with falsehood, slander and 
calumny, proved to be a tempest of trials that swept 
over those regions, yet it was powerless to do any 
harm to trees that are deep-rooted, firm, and fixed, 
nor could it inflict damage on structures that are 
solid, mighty and strong.  The blessed, the potent 
spirit of &Abdu'l-Baha will always protect and 
shield the holy and sanctified beings, will assist 
them, watch over them, and empower them to 
remain firm as immovable mountains.  
     Truly that which you have done is appropriate 
and the way you have reacted is highly fitting and 
proper, because in the Will and Testament primary 
emphasis has been laid on guarding and protecting 
the Cause of God.  Thus it has been revealed:  `O ye 
beloved of the Lord!  The greatest of all things is the 
protection of the true Faith of God, the preservation 
of His Law, the safeguarding of His Cause and 
service unto His Word.'  Praise be to God that those 
blessed and enraptured souls who are enkindled 
with the fire of His love have been graciously 
assisted to preserve and shield the Faith of God.  
     You must have glanced at the idle words of that 
faithless person--words that are wholly motivated 
by selfish and personal interests.  They are so futile, 
senseless and absurd that even the babes of this 
glorious Dispensation, rocked in their cradles, 
would recognize how vain and preposterous, how 
 
+F1 &Abdu'l-Husayn &Avarih (see &Baha'i Administration, &Baha'i 
+F1 Publishing Trust, Wilmette, pp. 137-139).  
 
+P216 
impregnated with subtle machinations they are.  
How much keener then must be the discernment 
of those distinguished beings whose substance of 
life has been moulded by the gracious and bountiful 
fingers of the Blessed Beauty and whose tree of 
existence has been watered and fed by the 
heavenly stream of His favour and providence.  
Surely those luminous gems whose nostrils are 
perfumed by the imperishable fragrance of holiness 
and are endued with a keen sense of perception 
will readily distinguish a loathsome odour, no 
matter how slight it may be, from the sweet-scented 
breeze blowing from the rose-garden of 
His Oneness.  They will easily recognize the words 
of a conceited and malevolent one, though his 
words be wrapped up in delicate terms and 
phrases or take the guise of fellow-feeling, sympathy 
and kindly wishes, from the genuine 
expressions of truth and sincerity, of devotion, 
piety and faithfulness.  
     Indeed, it is true to say that malice will cause 
one's intelligence and understanding to fade, and 
the king of reason to become subservient to the 
satanic self and its promptings.  Time and again 
has this matter been put to proof and the following 
blessed passage from the Will and Testament 
amply demonstrates this significant truth and 
serves to heighten the sense of alertness and vigilance.  
How wondrous is His Word:  `No doubt 
every vainglorious one that purposeth dissension 
and discord will not openly declare his evil purposes, 
 
+P217 
nay rather, even as impure gold, would he 
seize upon divers measures and various pretexts that 
he may separate the gathering of the people of 
&Baha.'  
     The essential point is this:  praise be to God, the 
way of His holy Faith is laid straight, the Edifice of 
the Law of God is well-founded and strong.  He to 
whom the people of &Baha must turn, the Centre on 
which the concourse of the faithful must fix their 
gaze, the Expounder of the Holy Writings, the 
Guardian of the Cause of God, the Chosen Branch, 
Shoghi Effendi, has been clearly appointed in conformity 
with explicit, conclusive and unmistakable 
terms.  The Religion of God, the laws and ordinances 
of God, the blessed teachings, the obligations 
that are binding on everyone--all stand clear and 
manifest even as the sun in its meridian glory.  There 
is no hidden mystery, no secret that remains concealed.  
There is no room for interpretation or 
argument, no occasion for doubt or hesitation.  The 
hour for teaching and service is come.  It is the time 
for unity, harmony, solidarity and high endeavour.  
     At the blessed Holy Shrines we earnestly pray that 
divine assistance and confirmation be vouchsafed to 
all of us.  We continually receive joyous news of the 
health and well-being of the Guardian of the Cause 
of God and eagerly hope that the night of separation 
may come to an end, that the period of bereavement 
may soon expire and his blessed person may return 
to this hallowed Spot with utmost joy and radiance.  
All the blessed leaves join this lowly maidservant in 
 
+P218 
sending wondrous expressions of greeting to those 
loved ones of God and the handmaids of the 
Merciful.  May the glory of the All-Glorious rest 
upon you!  
 
     80.  The question of &Avarih has surely come to 
your attention.  In spite of the fact that last year, the 
first time that he visited this sacred Spot, he was 
shown the greatest kindness and love, and he was 
the object of every consideration and care, and 
everything was done to help him in every way; that 
when he left for Europe, as the reason for his visit 
was to teach the Faith, and he was favoured and 
praised by the Guardian, the friends in England 
showed him reverence to what was really an exaggerated 
degree, and received him with the warmest 
hospitality--that is, no one failed in showing him 
the utmost regard--still, when he returned to Cairo 
and busied himself with publishing his book, as it 
became apparent later on, he put the Assembly and 
the friends at odds, stirred up the mischief himself 
and then secretly wrote here and there that there was 
trouble in Cairo, and presented the situation so as to 
further his own ends.  
     The beloved Guardian at once laid hold of every 
possible means to quiet the dissension in Cairo, but 
it proved impossible because &Avarih, using all 
kinds of devices, prevented the reconciliation of the 
Assembly and the friends in that city.  When the 
Guardian could endure this no longer and there was 
 
+P219 
nothing more that he could do, with deep regret he 
left the Holy Land.  His letter clearly shows how 
heavy was his heart.  
     Later, &Avarih left Egypt and came again to the 
Holy Land, and the interesting thing is that the 
moment he left, the misunderstandings among the 
friends in Cairo disappeared, and &Baha'i affairs 
went forward again in proper fashion, so that it 
became perfectly clear that he had been the cause of 
the disruption.  
     From here, too, he began to send out letters, and it 
would only grieve you to tell of the falsehoods and 
calumnies they contained.  In Beirut, too, his talks 
and his actions were the same, and he spread the 
word that, God forbid, there is dissension everywhere.  
Accordingly, in order to protect the Cause of 
God, a telegram was sent to &Baghdad, citing these 
words of the Ancient Beauty--exalted be His glory:  
`Place not your trust in every new arrival, and 
believe not every speaker.'  As a result, when he 
reached &Baghdad, and wished to stir up mischief 
there, the friends, with great dignity and firmness, 
restrained him, and avoided his company.  
     The point is that although such talk and such 
behaviour have no effect and no importance whatsoever, 
and do not merit our attention, still this 
disloyalty of his in these days of trial and sorrow is 
such that, unable to bear the situation any longer, 
this grieved and helpless one has felt obliged to set 
down a brief account of what actually took place.  
 
+P220 
     81.  Praise be to God that through His gracious 
bounty you were enabled to visit His exalted, His 
sacred and luminous Threshold, to refresh and 
perfume your nostrils with the sweet-scented fragrances 
of God diffused from these imperishable, holy 
Places.  This wondrous gift calls for thanksgiving, 
and this heavenly bestowal warrants praise and 
glorification.  And such praise is best expressed 
when one's pilgrimage, one's honour at attaining 
His holy Court and becoming the recipient of His 
favours and loving-kindness produce a profound 
effect and influence upon every aspect of one's life, 
upon one's bearing and demeanour, and one's 
activities.  There is no doubt that it will be so.  
 
     82.  It is a very long time since we have had any 
news from you and we are quite longing to have one 
of your interesting and beautiful letters, that brings 
us always comfort because of your sincerity, your 
love for the Cause and your constant energy in the 
work for the Cause.  You have ever been one of the 
Master's best friends, you are one of the oldest 
American believers, one of the firm and enthusiastic 
workers, and we are always happy to hear from you.  
The joy of our hearts is to hear that the friends are 
active and sincere in the spreading of the teachings.  
     We always long to hear about the friends, to know 
that in America they are arising with sincere energy 
to assist our beloved Guardian, to make his heart 
happy so that he may return to the Holy Land and 
 
+P221 
again take up, with renewed vigour, the burdens 
that are too great when he feels that the friends are 
not uniting with him to carry out the instructions of 
the Beloved.  We know that these instructions and 
teachings are the balm for the wounds and ills of the 
world, and if the friends are not firm, sincere and 
united in the principles as given by &Baha'u'llah, 
explained and amplified by &Abdu'l-Baha, and do 
not teach them clearly and keep them pure and 
unadulterated, then how can the ills of mankind be 
alleviated?  All other teachings have failed to eliminate 
the existing prejudices between peoples and 
religions and unite them upon the basis of pure 
truth, and now that we have this blessed remedy 
which is a divine solvent, let us not be blind or 
neglectful, but energetically and courageously stand 
forth as true heralds of this Divine Remedy.  
 
     83.  Your short and loving note of June 25th has 
been received.  Its contents, though short, gave me 
and the ladies of the Household great joy, because 
they indicate that the dear friends have, with willing 
efforts, arisen to strengthen the foundation of love 
and harmony in their hearts.  This will surely release 
our beloved Shoghi Effendi from his grief, fill his 
dear heart with joy and bring him to us again.  
     Since my last affectionate appeal to the beloved of 
God and &Abdu'l-Baha's spiritual children, the dear 
friends in every land have indeed shown a wonderful 
spirit which has inspired us all with joy and gratitude.  
 
+P222 
For their confirmation and success we ardently 
pray at the Holy Shrines.  I hope and pray that your 
National Spiritual Assembly will this year be 
favoured with divine support and unprecedented 
prosperity.  
 
     84.  Your charming letter of June 20th has 
arrived and with it the spiritual waves of your love 
and devotion to the welfare of the Cause of God and 
to the prosperity of the dear friends throughout 
America.  
     I pray at the Holy Shrine of our beloved Lord, 
&Abdu'l-Baha, to favour you with the realization of 
the desire of your heart which contributes to the joy 
and happiness of the beloved Guardian of the Cause, 
that is, service towards the unity of the dear friends 
and the promulgation of the divine Teachings which 
alone can redeem this lifeless world.  
     I am glad to tell you that the Guardian of the 
Cause of God is in good health.  The splendid 
attitude of the beloved friends in the East and the 
West and their wonderfully sacrificial efforts in the 
service of the Cause have greatly lightened the 
burden of grief upon his loving heart and so, he may 
return to the Holy Land towards the end of summer 
when his entire grief, we hope, will be replaced with 
joy and fragrances which are being wafted to his 
dear heart.  
 
+P223 
     85.  Your numerous letters written to the 
beloved Guardian and myself have all arrived and 
brought with them the sweet perfume of your 
devotion, sincerity, strong faith and active and 
beautiful services you are inexhaustibly rendering to 
the Cause of God.  You should be happy, dear 
&Baha'i sister in being so wonderfully confirmed in 
your spiritual life.  
     The beloved Guardian of the Cause is nowadays 
in good health and through the magnificent efforts 
the friends are exerting in every country to strengthen 
and augment their bond of unity and love for 
one another, his grief has been lightened and so we 
have great hope that he will return to the Holy Land 
before long.  Here he will resume his personal touch 
with the friends the world over and will inspire them 
with his guidance to still greater activity.  
     The Ladies of the Holy Family and I are always 
remembering you dear friends of &Abdu'l-Baha and 
praying for your confirmation and happiness.  I am 
thankful to all the dear friends who so faithfully and 
lovingly responded with their excellent deeds to my 
affectionate appeal for greater unity and love.  May 
the Blessed Beauty and &Abdu'l-Baha reward them 
richly and crown their sincere services with great 
results.  
 
     86.  From this hallowed Spot I send heavenly 
greetings to those two faithful servants of the holy 
Threshold of the &Abha Beauty.  Indeed, no word of 
 
+P224 
compliment could be compared to this expression of 
praise and commendation, whereby, thanks be to 
God, you both have distinguished yourselves as the 
devoted servants of His divine Threshold and as the 
sincere, the self-sacrificing bond-slaves serving at 
the door of His mercifulness.  You have always 
proved yourselves untiring in your noble efforts and 
are continually striving with utmost endeavour to 
discharge your important and glorious duties.  This 
can be attributed to naught save to the unfailing 
bounties of the &Abha Beauty and to the invisible aid 
that &Abdu'l-Baha has graciously accorded you.  
  
     87.  In this Day nothing is so important as service.  
Did not &Abdu'l-Baha voluntarily call Himself 
the `Servant' of &Baha, manifesting also in His life the 
perfections of servitude to God and man?  
     We, wishing to follow the commands left by 
&Baha'u'llah, spread and lived by &Abdu'l-Baha, 
we can take no greater step toward the Heavenly 
Kingdom--can give no greater joy to the present 
beloved Guardian of the Cause, Shoghi Effendi--
than that of loving service to all mankind.  
 
     88.  It always cheers my heart to hear from the 
dear friends whose hearts are so full of love and 
devotion, and desire to serve this Blessed Cause 
which has been proclaimed by &Baha'u'llah to all 
the world, so that all national, racial, and religious 
 
+P225 
prejudices will be abolished, and the world of 
humanity recognized as one home, and all men as 
brothers.  
     I certainly shall pray specially for you that you 
may be richly blessed in your work and service to 
the Blessed Cause.  One soul who becomes entirely 
selfless and devoted and filled to overflowing with 
the spirit of love and service will do much for the 
progress of the Cause in whatever locality he is.  Be 
assured, if you arise to serve, the Beloved Master 
says Nothing shall be impossible to you if you have faith.  
As ye have faith so shall your powers and blessings be.  I 
convey to you the warm love and &Baha'i greetings 
of Shoghi Effendi, and all the family, and again 
assure you of our earnest prayers that you will be 
enabled to render much service to the Kingdom.  
 
     89.  My heart is always cheered when I meet or 
hear from the dear friends in America, for the 
Beloved Master spoke so much to us about His visit 
to your land, and we feel confident that the teachings 
of the Blessed Perfection which He heralded forth 
have not fallen on barren soil and the day is not far 
distant when a rich harvest will be garnered therefrom.  
 
     90.  At the holy Threshold of the &Abha Beauty 
we fervently pray at all times for outstanding success 
to attend that exalted body.+F1  Indeed, by virtue of the 
 
+F1 The Local Spiritual Assembly of &Tihran.  
 
+P226 
brilliant achievements won and the distinguished 
services rendered by those blessed souls, the heart of 
this lowly one is filled with utmost joy and assurance, 
and there is no doubt that through the 
loving-kindness of God this measure of joy and 
happiness will be multiplied day by day.  
     You have asked me about my own knowledge 
and recollections concerning the holy Houses in 
&Tihran.  Unfortunately, due to my tender age at 
that time, those blessed places and quarters have 
faded from my memory.  
     Upon you be His glory and praise.  
 
     91.  O dear sisters, ardent lovers of &Baha'u'llah, 
may my soul be offered up for your devotion, 
your staunchness, and your steadfastness!  
     The letter from the honoured members of that 
spiritual assemblage, telling of the women of that 
land, their fervour, their fiery love for God, their 
services to His Cause, their unity and mutual 
kindness and loving fellowship, their grieving over 
the departure of the world's Day-Star--has reached 
this afflicted one.  Reading it, I begged most humbly 
of our Living and Eternal Lord, to aid and bless 
those handmaids at all times and under all conditions.  
He is verily the One Who is near to us all, and 
answers our prayers.  
     To us who sorrow here, there is truly no joy in life 
save only the good news that the lovers of God and 
of &Abdu'l-Baha, may my life be sacrificed for the 
 
+P227 
Spot which enshrines His holy Dust, are steadfast 
and firm, and that those loyal handmaids have 
girded themselves to serve the Faith, and casting 
aside on the pathway of God their ease and comfort, 
are proclaiming the Teachings, calling souls to life, 
and making sure that the sacred blood of the Primal 
Point, the afflictions and the captivity of the &Abha 
Beauty, the anguish of &Abdu'l-Baha shall through 
you, men and women alike, through your steadfastness 
today, yield goodly fruit for all on earth to see.  
     I presented your letter to the Chosen Branch, the 
Guardian of the Faith, Shoghi Effendi, and upon 
reading it he expressed great joy and satisfaction.  He 
expressed gratitude to the Lord that men and 
women have been raised up and are gathered 
beneath the banner of the Covenant, every one of 
whom, in the field of divine knowledge, can put 
armies of error to flight.  Through souls such as these 
is God's promise fulfilled:  `We shall aid whosoever will 
arise for the triumph of our Cause with the hosts of the 
Concourse on high and a company of Our favoured angels.'  
 
     92.  Your letter, laden with many a graceful 
phrase, many a wondrous inner meaning, has been 
received.  Its perusal brought composure and tranquillity  
to my soul and gladness to my heart, 
inasmuch as from between its lines I could discern 
the tokens of your unswerving constancy in God's 
Mighty Cause and of your intense devotion to the 
 
+P228 
almighty Lord.  I beseech God to illumine your heart 
with the light of His love, to unloose your tongue in 
magnifying His praise and in extolling His glory, to 
strengthen you with so mighty a power that you 
may vindicate the truth of His Faith by expounding 
infallible proofs and conclusive testimonies.  
     You have told me about your taking part in 
special gatherings for the training of Persian and 
American &Baha'i children.  Excellent indeed is 
what you have done.  Rest well assured, O handmaid 
of God, in the gracious favour of your Lord.  Verily 
He will sustain you in your efforts for the advancement 
of His Cause and in rendering service to the 
world of humanity.  Exert your utmost endeavour, 
and expend whatever is dear to you in this glorious 
path that you may earn the crown of righteousness, 
imperishable and everlasting.  
     Indeed the peoples of the world spend their days 
in idle imaginings, wholly oblivious to the Truth.  
Know of a certainty that the ornament of life is to be 
arrayed with the vesture of praiseworthy conduct 
and be attired with the crown of goodly deeds.  
     All the members of the family and myself are 
enjoying excellent health and we send our loving 
greetings and best wishes to you and to all the 
beloved friends there.  I earnestly beseech from His 
holy Threshold that He may purge you from every 
affliction, grant you perfect health and may aid you 
to serve His sublime Cause in this glorious Day.  
 
+P229 
                   VI
              DOCUMENTATION 
 
+P230 
 
+P231 
                   VI 
              DOCUMENTATION 
 
             LIST OF SOURCES 
 
I.     From the Writings of &Baha'u'llah 
         Dedicatory Passage.  From a Tablet addressed to 
         the Greatest Holy Leaf, inscribed in the original 
         Arabic on her Monument.  (See The &Baha'i World, 
         vol. V, p. 171) 
     1.  From a Tablet addressed to the Greatest Holy 
         Leaf.  (See The &Baha'i World, vol. V, p. 171)  
     2.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf
 
II.   From the Writings of &Abdu'l-Baha 
     1.  From a Tablet addressed to the Greatest Holy 
         Leaf.  (See The &Baha'i World, vol. V, pp. 171-172)  
     2.  From a Tablet addressed to the Greatest Holy 
         Leaf.  (See The &Baha'i World, vol. V, p. 172)  
     3.  From a Tablet addressed to the Greatest Holy 
         Leaf.  (See The &Baha'i World, vol. V, p. 172)  
 
+P232 
     4.  From a Tablet addressed to the Greatest Holy Leaf.  
         (See The &Baha'i World, vol. V, p. 172)  
     5.  From a Tablet addressed to the Greatest Holy 
         Leaf.  (See The &Baha'i World, vol. V, p. 172)  
     6.  From a Tablet addressed to &Munirih &Khanum, the 
         wife of &Abdu'l-Baha.  (See The &Baha'i World, vol. 
         V, p. 172)  
     7.  From a Tablet addressed to &Diya'iyyih &Khanum, 
         eldest daughter of &Abdu'l-Baha.  (See The &Baha'i 
         World, vol. V, p. 172)  
     8.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf 
     9.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf 
    10.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf 
    11.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf 
    12.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf 
    13.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to &Haji 
         &Mirza &Hasan-i-Khurasani 
    14.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf 
    15.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf 
    16.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf 
    17.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf 
    18.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf 
    19.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf 
 
+P233 
    20.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to the 
         Greatest Holy Leaf 
    21.  From an unpublished Tablet addressed to &Munirih 
         &Khanum
 
III.  From the Writings of Shoghi Effendi 
 
     Unless otherwise specified the following excerpts are 
from letters addressed to individual believers.  
 
     1.  April 1922, announcement to the &Baha'is in the 
         west.  (Translated from the Persian)  (See Star of the 
         West, vol. 13, pp. 81-82, and &Baha'i Administration, 
         p. 25)  
     2.  21 March 1932, to the &Baha'is of the United States 
         and Canada.  (See The World Order of &Baha'u'llah, 
         pp. 67-68)  
     3.  15 July 1932, to the National Spiritual Assembly of 
         the &Baha'is of the United States and Canada.  (See 
         Messages to America, p. 1)  
     4.  15 July 1932, to the National Spiritual Assembly of 
         the &Baha'is of the British Isles 
     5.  3 &Kalimat 89 (15 July 1932 A.D.), to the &Baha'is of 
         the East.  (Translated from the Persian)  
     6.  17 July 1932, to the &Baha'is of the West.  (See 
         &Baha'i Administration, 1974 edn., pp. 187-196)  
     7.  18 July 1932, to the National Spiritual Assembly of
         the &Baha'is of the United States and Canada 
     8.  18 July 1932 
     9.  1 August 1932, to the National Spiritual Assembly 
         of the &Baha'is of the United States and Canada 
    10.  15 August 1932 
    11.  23 August 1932 
 
+P234 
    12.  23 August 1932, to the Spiritual Assembly of the 
         &Baha'is of Yonkers, N.Y.  
    13.  25 August 1932 
    14.  30 August 1932, to the Spiritual Assembly of the 
         &Baha'is of Berkeley, California 
    15.  30 August 1932, to the Spiritual Assembly of the 
         &Baha'is of Racine, Wisconsin 
    16.  1 September 1932, to the &Baha'is of Washington, 
         D.C.  
    17.  1 September 1932, to the National Spiritual 
         Assembly of the &Baha'is of the United States and 
         Canada 
    18.  5 September 1932.  (Translated from the Persian)  
    19.  10 September 1932, to the &Baha'is of Glendale, 
         California 
    20.  10 September 1932, to the National Spiritual 
         Assembly of the &Baha'is of the United States and 
         Canada 
    21.  10 September 1932 
    22.  11 October 1932, to the Spiritual Assembly of the 
         &Baha'is of Teaneck, New Jersey 
    23.  27 October 1932, to the National Spiritual 
         Assembly of the &Baha'is of the United States and 
         Canada 
    24.  2 &Masa'il 89 (13 December 1932 A.D.), to the 
         &Baha'is of Iran.  (Translated from the Persian)  
    25.  14 January 1933, to the &Baha'is of the United 
         States and Canada 
    26.  21 April 1933, to the &Baha'is of the United States 
         and Canada.  (See The World Order of &Baha'u'llah, 
         pp. 81-82)  
    27.  8 February 1934, to the &Baha'is of the West.  (See 
         The World Order of &Baha'u'llah, p. 98)  
    28.  25 December 1938, to the &Baha'is of the United 
 
+P235 
         States and Canada.  (See The Advent of Divine 
         Justice, p. 37)  
    29.  5 December 1939, to the &Baha'is of the United 
         States and Canada 
    30.  25 December 1939, to the &Baha'is of the East.  
         (Translated from the Persian)  
    31.  1944, God Passes By, p. 108 
    32.  1944, God Passes By, p. 347 
    33.  27 November 1954, to the &Baha'is of the World.  
         (See Messages to the &Baha'i World, p. 74)  
 
 
IV.  From Letters written in English on behalf of Shoghi 
Effendi by his Persian secretaries
 
     Unless otherwise specified the following excerpts are 
from letters addressed to individual believers.  
 
     1.  15 August 1932 
     2.  23 August 1932 
     3.  23 August 1932, to the Spiritual Assembly of the 
         &Baha'is of Yonkers, N.Y.  
     4.  25 August 1932 
     5.  30 August 1932, to the Spiritual Assembly of the 
         &Baha'is of Berkeley, California 
     6.  30 August 1932, to the Spiritual Assembly of the 
         &Baha'is of Racine, Wisconsin 
     7.  30 August 1932 
     8.  1 September 1932, to the &Baha'is of Washington, 
         D.C.  
     9.  5 September 1932.  (Translated from the Persian)  
 
+P236 
    10.  9 September 1932.  (Translated from the Persian)  
    11.  9 September 1932.  (Translated from the Persian)  
    12.  10 September 1932, to the &Baha'is of Jacksonville, 
         Florida 
    13.  10 September 1932, to the &Baha'is of Monroe, 
         Washington 
    14.  10 September 1932, to the National Spiritual 
         Assembly of the &Baha'is of the United States and 
         Canada 
    15.  15 September 1932.  (Translated from the Persian)  
    16.  15 September 1932.  (Translated from the Persian)  
    17.  15 September 1932, to the Spiritual Assembly of 
         the &Baha'is of &Shiraz.  (Translated from the 
         Persian)  
    18.  15 September 1932, to the National Spiritual 
         Assembly of the &Baha'is of the United States and 
         Canada 
    19.  4 October 1932, to the &Baha'is of Australia 
    20.  4 October 1932, to the Spiritual Assembly of the 
         &Baha'is of Phoenix, Arizona 
    21.  6 October 1932 
    22.  7 October 1932 
    23.  8 October 1932, to the Spiritual Assembly of the 
         &Baha'is of Adelaide, Australia 
    24.  10 October 1932 
    25.  11 October 1932, to the &Baha'is of Teaneck, New 
         Jersey 
    26.  18 October 1932 
    27.  29 October 1932 
    28.  9 November 1932 
    29.  9 November 1932 
    30.  30 November 1932 
    31.  15 March 1933 
    32.  29 May 1933, to the &Baha'is of Bournemouth, 
         England 
    33.  6 March 1945.  (Translated from the Persian)  
 
+P237 
V.  From Letters of the Greatest Holy Leaf 
 
     Unless otherwise specified the following excerpts are 
from letters addressed to individual believers.  
 
     1.  See facsimile of original, facing page 157 
     2.  12 &Muharram 1307 A.H. (8 September 1889 A.D.)  
     3.  14 &Shavval 1310 A.H. (1 May 1893 A.D.)  
     4.  &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1314 A.H. (3 April-2 May 1897 A.D.)  
     5.  9 &Muharram 1315 A.H. (10 June 1897 A.D.)  
     6.  &Dhi'l-Hijjih 1316 A.H. (12 April-11 May 1899 
         A.D.)  
     7.  &Dhi'l-Hijjih 1316 A.H. (12 April-11 May 1899 
         A.D.)  
     8.  7 &Muharram 1317 A.H. (18 May 1899 A.D.)  
     9.  &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1318 A.H. (20 February-21 March 
         1901 A.D.)  
    10.  Undated, postmarked 9 April 1901 
    11.  &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1321 A.H. (19 January-17 February 
         1904 A.D.), to a believer in &Tihran 
    12.  &Jamadiyu'th-Thani 1322 A.H. (13 August-10 
         September 1904 A.D.), to a &Baha'i family 
    13.  &Safar 1323 A.H. (7 April-5 May 1905 A.D.)  
    14.  &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1323 A.H. (28 December 1905-26 
         January 1906 A.D.), to a believer in Yazd 
    15.  &Safar 1325 A.H. (16 March-13 April 1907 A.D.)  
    16.  1 January 1921 
    17.  Undated, to the President of the &Baha'i Women's 
         Society in Chicago 
    18.  Undated 
    19.  Undated 
    20.  Undated 
    21.  28 November 1921, to the Executive Board of 
         &Baha'i Temple Unity 
    22.  14 December 1921 (date received), to the Executive 
         Board of &Baha'i Temple Unity 
 
+P238 
    23.  22 December 1921 (date received), to the Executive 
         Board of &Baha'i Temple Unity 
    24.  17 January 1922 (date received), to the Executive 
         Board of &Baha'i Temple Unity 
    25.  &Sha'ban 1340 A.H. (30 March-28 April 1922 A.D.), 
         to the Servants of the Blessed Beauty and the dear 
         friends of &Abdu'l-Baha.  (See Star of the West, vol. 
         13, pp. 82-83)  
    26.  Feast of &Ridvan 1922 (21 April-2 May 1922 A.D.), 
         to the friends in America.  (See Star of the West, vol. 
         13, pp. 88)  
    27.  1 May 1922 (date received), to the National 
         Spiritual Assembly of the &Baha'is of the United 
         States and Canada 
    28.  &Ramadan 1340 A.H. (28 April-27 May 1922 A.D.), 
         to a believer in &Tihran
    29.  &Ramadan 1340 A.H. (28 April-27 May 1922 A.D.), 
         to the &Baha'is in Iran 
    30.  &Ramadan 1340 A.H. (28 April-27 May 1922 A.D.), 
         to a believer in &Tabriz 
    31.  &Ramadan 1340 A.H. (28 April-27 May 1922 A.D.), 
         to a &Baha'i family in &Tabriz 
    32.  &Ramadan 1340 A.H. (28 April-27 May 1922 A.D.), 
         to a believer in &Qazvin 
    33.  &Ramadan 1340 A.H. (28 April-27 May 1922 A.D.), 
         to the Spiritual Assembly of the &Baha'is of &Tabriz 
    34.  &Shavval 1340 A.H. (28 May-25 June 1922 A.D.), to 
         the &Baha'is in &Khusif 
    35.  &Shavval 1340 A.H. (28 May-25 June 1922 A.D.) 
    36.  &Shavval 1340 A.H. (28 May-25 June 1922 A.D.), to 
         a believer in &Tabriz 
    37.  &Shavval 1340 A.H. (28 May-25 June 1922 A.D.), to 
         the Spiritual Assembly of the &Baha'is of &Ardikan 
    38.  &Shavval 1340 A.H. (28 May-25 June 1922 A.D.), to 
         a believer in Karachi 
 
+P239 
    39.  26 &Shavval 1340 A.H. (22 June 1922 A.D.), to a 
         believer in &Qazvin 
    40.  &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1340 A.H. (26 June-25 July 1922 
         A.D.), to a believer in &Miyanaj 
    41.  &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1340 A.H. (26 June-25 July 1922 
         A.D.), to a believer in &Shiraz 
    42.  &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1340 A.H. (26 June-25 July 1922 
         A.D.), to the &Baha'is in &Khurasan 
    43.  &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1340 A.H. (26 June-25 July 1922 
         A.D.), to the Friends of God 
    44.  &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1340 A.H. (26 June-25 July 1922 
         A.D.), to a believer in &Khurasan 
    45.  12 &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1340 A.H. (7 July 1922 A.D.), to a 
         believer in &Takur, &Nur 
    46.  15 &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1340 A.H. (10 July 1922 A.D.), to 
         the &Baha'is of &Husayn-Abad, Yazd 
    47.  19 &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1340 A.H. (14 July 1922 A.D.), to 
         the &Baha'is of &Miyanaj 
    48.  22 &Dhi'l-Qa'dih 1340 A.H. (17 July 1922 A.D.), to a
         believer in &Ishqabad, &Turkistan 
    49.  20 July 1922, to the &Baha'is in America 
    50.  4 August 1922, to the &Baha'is in the West 
    51.  15 &Dhi'l-Hijjih 1340 A.H. (8 August 1922 A.D.), to 
         a believer in &Tihran 
    52.  9 August 1922 
    53.  10 August 1922, to a believer in Alexandria, 
         Egypt 
    54.  20 &Muharram 1341 A.H. (12 September 1922 A.D.)  
    55.  22 &Muharram 1341 A.H. (14 September 1922 A.D.), 
         to a believer in &Khurasan 
    56.  22 &Muharram 1341 A.H. (14 September 1922 A.D.), 
         to the members of the Spiritual Assembly of 
         &Shishavan, a village in &Adhirbayjan 
    57.  24 &Muharram 1341 A.H. (16 September 1922 A.D.), 
         to the &Baha'is of &Gav-Gan, a village near &Tabriz 
 
+P240 
    58.  1 &Safar 1341 A.H. (23 September 1922 A.D.), to a 
         believer in &Tihran 
    59.  22 &Safar 1341 A.H. (14 October 1922 A.D.), to a 
         believer in &Tihran 
    60.  2 &Rabi'u'l-Avval 1341 A.H. (23 October 1922 A.D.)  
    61.  2 &Rabi'u'l-Avval 1341 A.H. (23 October 1922 
         A.D.), to the Spiritual Assembly of the &Baha'is of 
         &Tihran 
    62.  5 &Rabi'u'l-Avval 1341 A.H. (26 October 1922 
         A.D.), to a believer in &Isfahan 
    63.  5 &Rabi'u'l-Avval 1341 A.H. (26 October 1922 
         A.D.), to the Maidservants of the Blessed Beauty in 
         Sang-i-Sar 
    64.  25 November 1922 
    65.  Undated, to the friends in Yonkers, New York.  
         (See Star of the West, vol. 13, p. 220, of November 
         1922)  
    66.  2 December 1922, to a believer in Egypt 
    67.  15 &Rabi'u'th-Thani 1341 A.H. (5 December 1922 
         A.D.), to a believer in &Tihran 
    68.  15 &Rabi'u'th-Thani 1341 A.H. (5 December 1922 
         A.D.), to the members of the Spiritual Assembly of 
         the &Baha'is of &Tihran 
    69.  15 &Rabi'u'th-Thani 1341 A.H. (5 December 1922 
         A.D.), to the members of the Chicago Temple 
         Fund Committee in &Tihran 
    70.  25 &Rabi'u'th-Thani 1341 A.H. (15 December 1922 
         A.D.)  
    71.  11 December 1922 
    72.  23 July 1923 
    73.  9 &Safar 1342 A.H. (21 September 1923 A.D.), to the 
         members of the Spiritual Assembly of the &Baha'is 
         of &Shiraz 
 
+P241 
    74.  4 &Rabi'u'th-Thani 1342 A.H. (14 November 1923 
         A.D.), to a believer in &Tihran 
    75.  28 November 1923, to the Spiritual Assembly of 
         the &Baha'is of Yonkers, New York 
    76.  3 December 1923 
    77.  21 &Sha'ban 1342 A.H. (28 March 1924 A.D.), to the 
         members of the Spiritual Assemblies and all the 
         Friends of God in the East 
    78.  3 &Shavval 1342 A.H. (8 May 1924 A.D.), to the 
         Friends of God and the Maidservants of the 
         Merciful 
    79.  27 May 1924, to the Spiritual Assembly of the 
         &Baha'is of &Hamadan 
    80.  24 &Shavval 1342 A.H. (29 May 1924 A.D.), to a 
         believer in &Tihran 
    81.  14 August 1924 
    82.  28 June 1924 
    83.  19 July 1924 
    84.  19 July 1924 
    85.  18 August 1924 
    86.  15 June 1925, to a &Baha'i couple in Stuttgart, 
         Germany 
    87.  8 October 1924 
    88.  13 May 1928 
    89.  12 March 1929 
    90.  4 &Jamadiyu'l-Avval 1348 A.H. (8 October 1929 
         A.D.), to the Spiritual Assembly of the &Baha'is of 
         &Tihran 
    91.  Undated, to the Maidservants of the Merciful in 
         &Abadih 
    92.  Undated 
