
Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 62: 

        Wedlock, Marriage
                (Nikaah) 

Volume 7, Book 62, Number 1: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     A group of three men came to the houses of the
     wives of the Prophet asking how the Prophet
     worshipped (Allah), and when they were
     informed about that, they considered their
     worship insufficient and said, "Where are we
     from the Prophet as his past and future sins have
     been forgiven." Then one of them said, "I will
     offer the prayer throughout the night forever."
     The other said, "I will fast throughout the year
     and will not break my fast." The third said, "I will
     keep away from the women and will not marry
     forever." Allah's Apostle came to them and said,
     "Are you the same people who said so-and-so?
     By Allah, I am more submissive to Allah and
     more afraid of Him than you; yet I fast and break
     my fast, I do sleep and I also marry women. So
     he who does not follow my tradition in religion, is
     not from me (not one of my followers)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 2: 

     Narrated 'Ursa: 

     that he asked 'Aisha about the Statement of
     Allah: 'If you fear that you shall not be able to
     deal justly with the orphan girls, then marry
     (other) women of your choice, two or three or
     four; but if you fear that you shall not be able to
     deal justly (with them), then only one, or (the
     captives) that your right hands possess. That will
     be nearer to prevent you from doing injustice.'
     (4.3) 'Aisha said, "O my nephew! (This Verse
     has been revealed in connection with) an orphan
     girl under the guardianship of her guardian who is
     attracted by her wealth and beauty and intends to
     marry her with a Mahr less than what other
     women of her standard deserve. So they (such
     guardians) have been forbidden to marry them
     unless they do justice to them and give them their
     full Mahr, and they are ordered to marry other
     women instead of them." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 3: 

     Narrated 'Alqama: 

     While I was with Abdullah, 'Uthman met him at
     Mina and said, "O Abu 'Abdur-Rahman ! I have
     something to say to you." So both of them went
     aside and 'Uthman said, "O Abu 'Abdur-Rah.
     man! Shall we marry you to a virgin who will
     make you remember your past days?" When
     'Abdullah felt that he was not in need of that, he
     beckoned me (to join him) saying, "O 'Alqama!"
     Then I heard him saying (in reply to 'Uthman),
     "As you have said that, (I tell you that) the
     Prophet once said to us, 'O young people!
     Whoever among you is able to marry, should
     marry, and whoever is not able to marry, is
     recommended to fast, as fasting diminishes his
     sexual power. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 4: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     We were with the Prophet while we were young
     and had no wealth whatever. So Allah's Apostle
     said, "O young people! Whoever among you can
     marry, should marry, because it helps him lower
     his gaze and guard his modesty (i.e. his private
     parts from committing illegal sexual intercourse
     etc.), and whoever is not able to marry, should
     fast, as fasting diminishes his sexual power." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 5: 

     Narrated 'Ata: 

     We presented ourselves along with Ibn 'Abbas at
     the funeral procession of Maimuna at a place
     called Sarif. Ibn 'Abbas said, "This is the wife of
     the Prophet so when you lift her bier, do not Jerk
     it or shake it much, but walk smoothly because
     the Prophet had nine wives and he used to
     observe the night turns with eight of them, and for
     one of them there was no night turn." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 6: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet I used to go round (have sexual
     relations with) all his wives in one night, and he
     had nine wives. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 7: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     Ibn 'Abbas asked me, "Are you married?" I
     replied, "No." He said, "Marry, for the best
     person of this (Muslim) nation (i.e., Muhammad)
     of all other Muslims, had the largest number of
     wives." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 8: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     The Prophet said, "The rewards (of deeds) are
     according to the intention, and everybody will get
     the reward for what he has intended. So
     whoever emigrated for Allah's and His Apostle's
     sake, his emigration was for Allah and His
     Apostle; and whoever emigrated for worldly
     benefits, or to marry a woman, then his
     emigration was for the thing for what he
     emigrated for." (1) 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 9: 

     Narrated Ibn Masud: 

     We used to fight in the holy battles in the
     company of the Prophet and we had no wives
     with us. So we said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall
     we get castrated?" The Prophet forbade us to do
     so. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 10: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf came (from Mecca to
     Medina) and the Prophet made a bond of
     brotherhood between him and Sad bin Ar-Rabi'
     Al-Ansari. Al-Ansari had two wives, so he
     suggested that 'Abdur-Rahman take half, his
     wives and property. 'Abdur-Rahman replied,
     "May Allah bless you with your wives and
     property. Kindly show me the market." So
     'Abdur-Rahman went to the market and gained
     (in bargains) some dried yoghurt and some
     butter. After a few days the Prophet saw
     Abdur-Rahman with some yellow stains on his
     clothes and asked him, "What is that, O
     'Abdur-Rahman?" He replied, "I had married an
     Ansari woman." The Prophet asked, "How much
     Mahr did you give her?" He replied, "The weight
     of one (date) stone of gold." The Prophet said,
     "Offer a banquet, even with one sheep." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 11: 

     Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade 'Uthman bin Maz'un to
     abstain from marrying (and other pleasures) and
     if he had allowed him, we would have gotten
     ourselves castrated.(1) 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 12: 

     Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas: 

     The Prophet prevented 'Uthman bin Mazun from
     that (not marrying), and had he allowed him, we
     would have got ourselves castrated.(1) 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 13o: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     We used to participate in the holy battles led by
     Allah's Apostle and we had nothing (no wives)
     with us. So we said, "Shall we get ourselves
     castrated?" He forbade us that and then allowed
     us to marry women with a temporary contract
     (2) and recited to us: -- 'O you who believe !
     Make not unlawful the good things which Allah
     has made lawful for you, but commit no
     transgression.' (5.87) 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 13h: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I am a young man and
     I am afraid that I may commit illegal sexual
     intercourse and I cannot afford to marry." He
     kept silent, and then repeated my question once
     again, but he kept silent. I said the same (for the
     third time) and he remained silent. Then repeated
     my question (for the fourth time), and only then
     the Prophet said, "O Abu Huraira! The pen has
     dried after writing what you are going to
     confront. So (it does not matter whether you) get
     yourself castrated or not." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 14: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Suppose you landed
     in a valley where there is a tree of which
     something has been eaten and then you found
     trees of which nothing has been eaten, of which
     tree would you let your camel graze?" He said,
     "(I will let my camel graze) of the one of which
     nothing has been eaten before." (The
     sub-narrator added: 'Aisha meant that Allah's
     Apostle had not married a virgin besides herself
     .) 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 15: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle said (to me), "You have been
     shown to me twice in (my) dreams. A man was
     carrying you in a silken cloth and said to me,
     'This is your wife.' I uncovered it; and behold, it
     was you. I said to myself, 'If this dream is from
     Allah, He will cause it to come true.' " 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 16: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     While we were returning from a Ghazwa (Holy
     Battle) with the Prophet, I started driving my
     camel fast, as it was a lazy camel A rider came
     behind me and pricked my camel with a spear he
     had with him, and then my camel started running
     as fast as the best camel you may see. Behold!
     The rider was the Prophet himself. He said,
     'What makes you in such a hurry?" I replied, I
     am newly married " He said, "Did you marry a
     virgin or a matron? I replied, "A matron." He
     said, "Why didn't you marry a young girl so that
     you may play with her and she with you?" When
     we were about to enter (Medina), the Prophet
     said, "Wait so that you may enter (Medina) at
     night so that the lady of unkempt hair may comb
     her hair and the one whose husband has been
     absent may shave her pubic region. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 17: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     When I got married, Allah's Apostle said to me,
     "What type of lady have you married?" I replied,
     "I have married a matron' He said, "Why, don't
     you have a liking for the virgins and for fondling
     them?" Jabir also said: Allah's Apostle said,
     "Why didn't you marry a young girl so that you
     might play with her and she with you?' 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 18: 

     Narrated 'Ursa: 

     The Prophet asked Abu Bakr for 'Aisha's hand
     in marriage. Abu Bakr said "But I am your
     brother." The Prophet said, "You are my brother
     in Allah's religion and His Book, but she (Aisha)
     is lawful for me to marry." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 19: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The best women are the
     riders of the camels and the righteous among the
     women of Quraish. They are the kindest women
     to their children in their childhood and the more
     careful women of the property of their
     husbands." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 20: 

     Narrated Abu Burda's father: 

     Allah's Apostle said, any man who has a slave
     girl whom he educates properly, teaches good
     manners, manumits and marries her, will get a
     double reward And if any man of the people of
     the Scriptures believes in his own prophet and
     then believes in me too, he will (also) get a
     double reward And any slave who fulfills his duty
     to his master and to his Lord, will (also) get a
     double reward." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 21: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said: Abraham did not tell lies
     except three. (One of them was) when Abraham
     passed by a tyrant and (his wife) Sara was
     accompanying him (Abu Huraira then mentioned
     the whole narration and said:) (The tyrant) gave
     her Hajar. Sara said, "Allah saved me from the
     hands of the Kafir (i.e. infidel) and gave me
     Hajar to serve me." (Abu Huraira added:) That
     (Hajar) is your mother, O Banu Ma'-As-Sama'
     (i.e., the Arabs). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 22: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet stayed for three days between
     Khaibar and Medina, and there he consummated
     his marriage to Safiyya bint Huyai. I invited the
     Muslims to the wedding banquet in which neither
     meat nor bread was offered. He ordered for
     leather dining-sheets to be spread, and dates,
     dried yoghurt and butter were laid on it, and that
     was the Prophet's wedding banquet. The
     Muslims wondered, "Is she (Saffiyya) considered
     as his wife or his slave girl?" Then they said, "If
     he orders her to veil herself, she will be one of
     the mothers of the Believers; but if he does not
     order her to veil herself, she will be a slave girl.
     So when the Prophet proceeded from there, he
     spared her a space behind him (on his
     she-camel) and put a screening veil between her
     and the people. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 23: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle manumitted Safiyya and regarded
     her manumission as her Mahr. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 24: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi: 

     A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I have come to give you myself
     in marriage (without Mahr)." Allah's Apostle
     looked at her. He looked at her carefully and
     fixed his glance on her and then lowered his
     head. When the lady saw that he did not say
     anything, she sat down. A man from his
     companions got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     If you are not in need of her, then marry her to
     me." The Prophet said, "Have you got anything
     to offer?" The man said, "No, by Allah, O Allah's
     Apostle!" The Prophet said (to him), "Go to your
     family and see if you have something." The man
     went and returned, saying, "No, by Allah, I have
     not found anything." Allah's Apostle said, "(Go
     again) and look for something, even if it is an iron
     ring." He went again and returned, saying, "No,
     by Allah, O Allah's Apostle! I could not find
     even an iron ring, but this is my Izar (waist
     sheet)." He had no rida. He added, "I give half of
     it to her." Allah's Apostle said, "What will she do
     with your Izar? If you wear it, she will be naked,
     and if she wears it, you will be naked." So that
     man sat down for a long while and then got up
     (to depart). When Allah's Apostle saw him
     going, he ordered that he be called back. When
     he came, the Prophet said, "How much of the
     Quran do you know?" He said, "I know such
     Sura and such Sura," counting them. The Prophet
     said, "Do you know them by heart?" He replied,
     "Yes." The Prophet said, "Go, I marry her to you
     for that much of the Quran which you have." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 25: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Abu Hudhaifa bin 'Utba bin Rabi'a bin Abdi
     Shams who had witnessed the battle of Badr
     along with the Prophet adopted Salim as his son,
     to whom he married his niece, Hind bint
     Al-Walid bin 'Utba bin Rabi'a; and Salim was the
     freed slave of an Ansar woman, just as the
     Prophet had adopted Zaid as his son. It was the
     custom in the Pre-lslamic Period that if
     somebody adopted a boy, the people would call
     him the son of the adoptive father and he would
     be the latter's heir. But when Allah revealed the
     Divine Verses: 'Call them by (the names of) their
     fathers . . . your freed-slaves,' (33.5) the
     adopted persons were called by their fathers'
     names. The one whose father was not known,
     would be regarded as a Maula and your brother
     in religion. Later on Sahla bint Suhail bin 'Amr
     Al-Quraishi Al-'Amiri--and she was the wife of
     Abu- Hudhaifa bin 'Utba--came to the Prophet
     and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We used to
     consider Salim as our (adopted) son, and now
     Allah has revealed what you know (regarding
     adopted sons)." The sub-narrator then mentioned
     the rest of the narration. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 26: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle entered upon Dubaa bint
     Az-Zubair and said to her, "Do you have a desire
     to perform the Hajj?" She replied, "By Allah, I
     feel sick." He said to her, "Intend to perform Hajj
     and stipulate something by saying, 'O Allah, I will
     finish my Ihram at any place where You stop me
     (i.e. I am unable to go further)." She was the wife
     of Al-Miqdad bin Al-Aswad. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 27: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A woman is married for four
     things, i.e., her wealth, her family status, her
     beauty and her religion. So you should marry the
     religious woman (otherwise) you will be a losers. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 28: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     A man passed by Allah's Apostle and Allah s
     Apostle asked (his companions) "What do you
     say about this (man)?" They replied "If he asks
     for a lady's hand, he ought to be given her in
     marriage; and if he intercedes (for someone) his
     intercessor should be accepted; and if he speaks,
     he should be listened to." Allah's Apostle kept
     silent, and then a man from among the poor
     Muslims passed by, an Allah's Apostle asked
     (them) "What do you say about this man?" They
     replied, "If he asks for a lady's hand in marriage
     he does not deserve to be married, and he
     intercedes (for someone), his intercession should
     not be accepted; And if he speaks, he should not
     be listened to.' Allah's Apostle said, "This poor
     man is better than so many of the first as filling
     the earth.' 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 29: 

     Narrated 'Ursa: 

     that he asked 'Aisha regarding the Verse: 'If you
     fear that you shall not be able to deal justly with
     the orphans (4.3) She said, "O my nephew! This
     Verse refers to the orphan girl who is under the
     guardianship of her guardian who likes her
     beauty and wealth and wishes to (marry her and)
     curtails her Mahr. Such guardians have been
     forbidden to marry them unless they do justice by
     giving them their full Mahr, and they have been
     ordered to marry other than them. The people
     asked for the verdict of Allah's Apostle after that,
     so Allah revealed: 'They ask your instruction
     concerning the women . . . whom you desire to
     marry.' (4.127) So Allah revealed to them that if
     the orphan girl had beauty and wealth, they
     desired to marry her and for her family status.
     They can only marry them if they give them their
     full Mahr. And if they had no desire to marry
     them because of their lack of wealth and beauty,
     they would leave them and marry other women.
     So, as they used to leave them, when they had
     no interest, in them, they were forbidden to
     marry them when they had such interest, unless
     they treated them justly and gave them their full
     Mahr Apostle said, 'If at all there is evil omen, it
     is in the horse, the woman and the house." a lady
     is to be warded off. And the Statement of Allah:
     'Truly, among your wives and your children,
     there are enemies for you (i.e may stop you from
     the obedience of Allah)' (64.14) 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 30: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Evil omen is in the women,
     the house and the horse.' 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 31: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Evil omen was mentioned before the Prophet:
     The Prophet said, "If there is evil omen in
     anything, it is in the house, the woman and the
     horse." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 32: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If at all there is bad omen,
     it is in the horse, the woman, and the house." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 33: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     The Prophet said, "After me I have not left any
     affliction more harmful to men than women." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 34: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     Three principles were established because of
     Barira: (i) When Banra was manumitted she was
     given the option (to remain with her slave
     husband or not). (ii) Allah's Apostle said "The
     Wala of the slave) is for the one who manumits
     (the slave). (iii) When Allah's Apostle entered
     (the house), he saw a cooking pot on the fire but
     he was given bread and meat soup from the soup
     of the home. The Prophet said, "Didn't I see the
     cooking pot (on the fire)?" It was said, "That is
     the meat given in charity to Barira, and you do
     not eat the (things given in) charity." The Prophet
     said, "It is an object of charity for Barira, and it is
     a present for us." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 35: 

     Narrated Aisha" 

     (regarding) the Verse: 'And if you fear that you
     shall not be able to deal justly with the orphans...'
     (4.3) It is about the orphan girl who is in the
     custody of a man who is her guardian, and he
     intends to marry her because of her wealth, but
     he treats her badly and does not manage her
     property fairly and honestly. Such a man should
     marry women of his liking other than her, two or
     three or four. 'Prohibited to you (for marriage)
     are: ...your foster-mothers (who suckled you).'
     (4.23) Marriage is prohibited between persons
     having a foster suckling relationship
     corresponding to a blood relationship which
     renders marriage unlawful. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 36: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) that while Allah's
     Apostle was with her, she heard a voice of a man
     asking permission to enter the house of Hafsa.
     'Aisha added: I said, "O Allah's Apostle! This
     man is asking permission to enter your house."
     The Prophet said, "I think he is so-and-so,"
     naming the foster-uncle of Hafsa. 'Aisha said, "If
     so-and-so," naming her foster uncle, "were living,
     could he enter upon me?" The Prophet said,
     "Yes, for foster suckling relations make all those
     things unlawful which are unlawful through
     corresponding birth (blood) relations." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 37: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     It was said to the Prophet, "Won't you marry the
     daughter of Hamza?" He said, "She is my foster
     niece (brother's daughter). " 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 38: 

     Narrated Um Habiba: 

     (daughter of Abu Sufyan) I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Marry my sister. the daughter of Abu
     Sufyan." The Prophet said, "Do you like that?" I
     replied, "Yes, for even now I am not your only
     wife and I like that my sister should share the
     good with me." The Prophet said, "But that is not
     lawful for me." I said, We have heard that you
     want to marry the daughter of Abu Salama." He
     said, "(You mean) the daughter of Um Salama?"
     I said, "Yes." He said, "Even if she were not my
     step-daughter, she would be unlawful for me to
     marry as she is my foster niece. I and Abu
     Salama were suckled by Thuwaiba. So you
     should not present to me your daughters or your
     sisters (in marriage)." Narrated 'Ursa; Thuwaiba
     was the freed slave girl of Abu Lahb whom he
     had manumitted, and then she suckled the
     Prophet. When Abu Lahb died, one of his
     relatives saw him in a dream in a very bad state
     and asked him, "What have you encountered?"
     Abu Lahb said, "I have not found any rest since I
     left you, except that I have been given water to
     drink in this (the space between his thumb and
     other fingers) and that is because of my
     manumitting Thuwaiba." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 39: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     that the Prophet entered upon her while a man
     was sitting with her. Signs of anger seemed to
     appear on his face as if he disliked that. She said,
     "Here is my (foster) brother." He said, "Be sure
     as to who is your foster brother, for foster
     suckling relationship is established only when
     milk is the only food of the child." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 40: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     that Aflah the brother of Abu Al-Qu'ais, her
     foster uncle, came, asking permission to enter
     upon her after the Verse of Al-Hijab (the use of
     veils by women) was revealed. 'Aisha added: I
     did not allow him to enter, but when Allah's
     Apostle came, I told him what I had done, and
     he ordered me to give him permission. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 41: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith: 

     I married a woman and then a black lady came
     to us and said, "I have suckled you both (you
     and your wife)." So I came to the Prophet and
     said, "I married so-and-so and then a black lady
     came to us and said to me, 'I have suckled both
     of you.' But I think she is a liar." The Prophet
     turned his face away from me and I moved to
     face his face, and said, "She is a liar." The
     Prophet said, "How (can you keep her as your
     wife) when that lady has said that she has
     suckled both of you? So abandon (i.e., divorce)
     her (your wife)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 42: 

     Narrated Um Habiba: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Do you like to have
     (my sister) the daughter of Abu Sufyan?" The
     Prophet said, "What shall I do (with her)?" I said,
     "Marry her." He said, "Do you like that?" I said,
     "(Yes), for even now I am not your only wife, so
     I like that my sister should share you with me."
     He said, "She is not lawful for me (to marry)." I
     said, "We have heard that you want to marry."
     He said, "The daughter of Um Salama?" I said,
     "Yes." He said, "Even if she were not my
     stepdaughter, she should be unlawful for me to
     marry, for Thuwaiba suckled me and her father
     (Abu Salama). So you should neither present
     your daughters, nor your sisters, to me." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 43: 

     Narrated Um Habiba: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Marry my sister, the
     daughter of Abu Sufyan." He said, "Do you like
     that?" I said, "Yes, for even now I am not your
     only wife; and the most beloved person to share
     the good with me is my sister." The Prophet said,
     "But that is not lawful for me (i.e., to be married
     to two sisters at a time.)" I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! By Allah, we have heard that you want
     to marry Durra, the daughter of Abu Salama."
     He said, "You mean the daughter of Um
     Salama?" I said, "Yes." He said, "By Allah !
     Even if she were not my stepdaughter, she would
     not be lawful for me to marry, for she is my
     foster niece, for Thuwaiba has suckled me and
     Abu Salama; so you should neither present your
     daughters, nor your sisters to me." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 44: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade that a woman should be
     married to man along with her paternal or
     maternal aunt. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 45: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A woman and her paternal
     aunt should not be married to the same man; and
     similarly, a woman and her maternal aunt should
     not be married to the same man." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 46: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet forbade that a woman should be
     married to a man along with her paternal aunt or
     with her maternal aunt (at the same time).
     Az-Zuhri (the sub-narrator) said: There is a
     similar order for the paternal aunt of the father of
     one's wife, for 'Ursa told me that 'Aisha said,
     "What is unlawful because of blood relations, is
     also unlawful because of the corresponding foster
     suckling relations." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 47: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar : 

     Allah's Apostle forbade Ash-Shighar, which
     means that somebody marries his daughter to
     somebody else, and the latter marries his
     daughter to the former without paying Mahr. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 48: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     Khaula bint Hakim was one of those ladies who
     presented themselves to the Prophet for
     marriage. 'Aisha said, "Doesn't a lady feel
     ashamed for presenting herself to a man?" But
     when the Verse: "(O Muhammad) You may
     postpone (the turn of) any of them (your wives)
     that you please,' (33.51) was revealed, " 'Aisha
     said, 'O Allah's Apostle! I do not see, but, that
     your Lord hurries in pleasing you.' " 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 49: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet got married while he was in the
     state of Ihram. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 50: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     I said to Ibn 'Abbas, "During the battle of
     Khaibar the Prophet forbade (Nikah) Al-Mut'a
     and the eating of donkey's meat." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 51: 

     Narrated Abu Jamra: 

     I heard Ibn Abbas (giving a verdict) when he
     was asked about the Mut'a with the women, and
     he permitted it (Nikah-al-Mut'a). On that a freed
     slave of his said to him, "That is only when it is
     very badly needed and women are scarce." On
     that, Ibn 'Abbas said, "Yes." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 52: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah and Salama bin
     Al-Akwa': 

     While we were in an army, Allah's Apostle came
     to us and said, "You have been allowed to do the
     Mut'a (marriage), so do it." Salama bin
     Al-Akwa' said: Allah's Apostle's said, "If a man
     and a woman agree (to marry temporarily), their
     marriage should last for three nights, and if they
     like to continue, they can do so; and if they want
     to separate, they can do so." I do not know
     whether that was only for us or for all the people
     in general. Abu Abdullah (Al-Bukhari) said: 'Ali
     made it clear that the Prophet said, "The Mut'a
     marriage has been cancelled (made unlawful)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 53: 

     Narrated Thabit Al-Banani: 

     I was with Anas while his daughter was present
     with him. Anas said, "A woman came to Allah's
     Apostle and presented herself to him, saying, 'O
     Allah's Apostle, have you any need for me (i.e.
     would you like to marry me)?' "Thereupon
     Anas's daughter said, "What a shameless lady
     she was ! Shame! Shame!" Anas said, "She was
     better than you; she had a liking for the Prophet
     so she presented herself for marriage to him." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 54: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     A woman presented herself to the Prophet (for
     marriage). A man said to him, "O Allah's
     Apostle! (If you are not in need of her) marry her
     to me." The Prophet said, "What have you got?"
     The man said, "I have nothing." The Prophet said
     (to him), "Go and search for something) even if it
     were an iron ring." The man went and returned
     saying, "No, I have not found anything, not even
     an iron ring; but this is my (Izar) waist sheet, and
     half of it is for her." He had no Rida' (upper
     garment). The Prophet said, "What will she do
     with your waist sheet? If you wear it, she will
     have nothing over her; and if she wears it, you
     will have nothing over you." So the man sat down
     and when he had sat a long time, he got up (to
     leave). When the Prophet saw him (leaving), he
     called him back, or the man was called (for him),
     and he said to the man, "How much of the Quran
     do you know (by heart)?" The man replied I
     know such Sura and such Sura (by heart),"
     naming the Suras The Prophet said, "I have
     married her to you for what you know of the
     Quran " 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 55: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar : 

     'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, "When Hafsa bint
     'Umar became a widow after the death of (her
     husband) Khunais bin Hudhafa As-Sahmi who
     had been one of the companions of the Prophet,
     and he died at Medina. I went to 'Uthman bin
     'Affan and presented Hafsa (for marriage) to him.
     He said, "I will think it over.' I waited for a few
     days, then he met me and said, 'It seems that it is
     not possible for me to marry at present.' " 'Umar
     further said, "I met Abu Bakr As-Siddique and
     said to him, 'If you wish, I will marry my daughter
     Hafsa to you." Abu Bakr kept quiet and did not
     say anything to me in reply. I became more angry
     with him than with 'Uthman. I waited for a few
     days and then Allah's Apostle asked for her
     hand, and I gave her in marriage to him.
     Afterwards I met Abu Bakr who said, 'Perhaps
     you became angry with me when you presented
     Hafsa to me and I did not give you a reply?' I
     said, 'Yes.' Abu Bakr said, 'Nothing stopped me
     to respond to your offer except that I knew that
     Allah's Apostle had mentioned her, and I never
     wanted to let out the secret of Allah's Apostle.
     And if Allah's Apostle had refused her, I would
     have accepted her.' " 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 56: 

     Narrated Zainab bint Salama: 

     Um Habiba said to Allah's Apostle "We have
     heard that you want to marry Durra bint
     Abu-Salama." Allah's Apostle said, "Can she be
     married along with Um Salama (her mother)?
     Even if I have not married Um Salama, she
     would not be lawful for me to marry, for her
     father is my foster brother." 'And there is no
     blame on you if you make hint of betrothal or
     conceal it in your hearts. Allah is Oft-Forgiving,
     Most Forbearing.' (2.235) Ibn 'Abbas said, "Hint
     your intention of marrying' is made by saying (to
     the widow) for example: "I want to marry, and I
     wish that Allah will make a righteous lady
     available for me.' " Al-Qasim said: One may say
     to the widow: 'I hold all respect for you, and I
     am interested in you; Allah will bring you much
     good, or something similar 'Ata said: One should
     hint his intention, and should not declare it
     openly. One may say: 'I have some need. Have
     good tidings. Praise be to Allah; you are fit to
     remarry.' She (the widow) may say in reply: I am
     listening to what you say,' but she should not
     make a promise. Her guardian should not make a
     promise (to somebody to get her married to him)
     without her knowledge. But if, while still in the
     Iddat period, she makes a promise to marry
     somebody, and he ultimately marries her, they
     are not to be separated by divorce (i.e., the
     marriage is valid). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 57: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle said (to me), "You were shown
     to me in a dream. An angel brought you to me,
     wrapped in a piece of silken cloth, and said to
     me, 'This is your wife.' I removed the piece of
     cloth from your face, and there you were. I said
     to myself. 'If it is from Allah, then it will surely
     be.' " 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 58: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I have come to you to present
     myself to you (for marriage)." Allah's Apostle
     glanced at her. He looked at her carefully and
     fixed his glance on her and then lowered his
     head. When the lady saw that he did not say
     anything, she sat down. A man from his
     companions got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     If you are not in need of her, then marry her to
     me." The Prophet said, "Have you got anything
     to offer." The man said, 'No, by Allah, O Allah's
     Apostle!" The Prophet said (to him), "Go to your
     family and try to find something." So the man
     went and returned, saying, "No, by Allah, O
     Allah's Apostle! I have not found anything." The
     Prophet said, "Go again and look for something,
     even if it were an iron ring." He went and
     returned, saying, "No, by Allah, O Allah's
     Apostle! I could not find even an iron ring, but
     this is my Izar (waist sheet).' He had no Rida
     (upper garment). He added, "I give half of it to
     her." Allah's Apostle said "What will she do with
     your Izar? If you wear it, she will have nothing
     over herself thereof (will be naked); and if she
     wears it, then you will have nothing over yourself
     thereof ' So the man sat for a long period and
     then got up (to leave). When Allah's Apostle saw
     him leaving, he ordered that he e called back.
     When he came, the Prophet asked (him), "How
     much of the Qur'an do you know (by heart)?"
     The man replied, I know such Sura and such
     Sura and such Sura," naming the suras. The
     Prophet said, "Can you recite it by heart?" He
     said, 'Yes." The Prophet said, "Go I let you
     marry her for what you know of the Quran (as
     her Mahr). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 59: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (as regards the Verse): 'And about what is
     recited unto you in the Book, concerning orphan
     girls to whom you give not the prescribed
     portions and yet, whom you desire to marry.'
     (4.127) This Verse is about the female orphan
     who is under the guardianship of a man with
     whom she shares her property and he has more
     right over her (than anybody else) but does not
     like to marry her, so he prevents her, from
     marrying somebody else, lest he should share the
     property with him. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 60: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     When Hafsa, 'Umar's daughter became a widow
     because of the death of her (husband) Ibn
     Hudhafa As-Sahmi who was one of the
     companion of the Prophet and the one of the
     Badr warriors and died at Medina, 'Umar said, "I
     met 'Uthman bin 'Affan and gave him an offer,
     saying, 'If you wish, I will marry Hafsa to you.'
     He said. 'I will think it over' I waited for a few
     days, then he met me and said, 'I have made up
     my mind not to marry at present' "Umar added,
     "Then I met Abu Bakr and said to him, 'If you
     wish, I will marry Hafsa to you.' " 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 61: 

     Narrated Al-Hasan: 

     concerning the Verse: 'Do not prevent them'
     (2.232) Ma'qil bin Yasar told me that it was
     revealed in his connection. He said, "I married
     my sister to a man and he divorced her, and
     when her days of 'Idda (three menstrual periods)
     were over, the man came again and asked for
     her hand, but I said to him, 'I married her to you
     and made her your bed (your wife) and favored
     you with her, but you divorced her. Now you
     come to ask for her hand again? No, by Allah,
     she will never go back to you (again)!' That man
     was not a bad man and his wife wanted to go
     back to him. So Allah revealed this Verse: 'Do
     not prevent them.' (2.232) So I said, 'Now I will
     do it (let her go back to him), O Allah's
     Apostle."So he married her to him again. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 62: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (regarding His Statement): 'They ask your
     instruction concerning the women. Say: Allah
     instructs you about them ...' (4.127) It is about
     the female orphan who is under the guardianship
     of a man with whom she shares her property and
     he does not want to marry her and dislikes that
     someone else should marry her, lest he should
     share the property with him, so he prevents her
     from marrying. So Allah forbade such a guardian
     to do so (i.e. to prevent her from marrying). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 63: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     While we were sitting in the company of the
     Prophet a woman came to him and presented
     herself (for marriage) to him. The Prophet looked
     at her, lowering his eyes and raising them, but did
     not give a reply. One of his companions said,
     "Marry her to me O Allah's Apostle!" The
     Prophet asked (him), "Have you got anything?"
     He said, "I have got nothing." The Prophet said,
     "Not even an iron ring?" He Sad, "Not even an
     iron ring, but I will tear my garment into two
     halves and give her one half and keep the other
     half." The Prophet; said, "No. Do you know
     some of the Quran (by heart)?" He said, "Yes."
     The Prophet said, "Go, I have agreed to marry
     her to you with what you know of the Qur'an (as
     her Mahr)." 'And for those who have no courses
     (i.e. they are still immature). (65.4) And the
     'Iddat for the girl before puberty is three months
     (in the above Verse). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 64: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     that the Prophet married her when she was six
     years old and he consummated his marriage
     when she was nine years old, and then she
     remained with him for nine years (i.e., till his
     death). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 65: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     that the Prophet married her when she was six
     years old and he consummated his marriage
     when she was nine years old. Hisham said: I have
     been informed that 'Aisha remained with the
     Prophet for nine years (i.e. till his death)." what
     you know of the Quran (by heart)' 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 66: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, "I
     present myself (to you) (for marriage). She
     stayed for a long while, then a man said, "If you
     are not in need of her then marry her to me." The
     Prophet said, "Have you got anything m order to
     pay her Mahr?" He said, "I have nothing with me
     except my Izar (waist sheet)." The Prophet said,
     "If you give her your Izar, you will have no Izar
     to wear, (so go) and search for something. He
     said, "I could not find anything." The Prophet
     said, "Try (to find something), even if it were an
     iron ring But he was not able to find (even that)
     The Prophet said (to him). "Do you memorize
     something of the Qur'an?" "Yes. ' he said, "such
     Sura and such Sura," naming those Suras The
     Prophet said, "We have married her to you for
     what you know of the Quran (by heart)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 67: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A matron should not be given
     in marriage except after consulting her; and a
     virgin should not be given in marriage except
     after her permission." The people asked, "O
     Allah's Apostle! How can we know her
     permission?" He said, "Her silence (indicates her
     permission)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 68: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! A virgin feels shy." He
     said, "Her consent is (expressed by) her silence."


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 69: 

     Narrated Khansa bint Khidam Al-Ansariya: 

     that her father gave her in marriage when she was
     a matron and she disliked that marriage. So she
     went to Allah's Apostle and he declared that
     marriage invalid. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 70: 

     Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid and
     Majammi bin Yazid. 

     the same ,Hadith above: A man called Khidam
     married a daughter of his (to somebody) against
     her consent. 'If you fear that you shall not be able
     to deal justly with the orphan girls then marry
     (other) women of your choice.' (4.3) And if
     somebody says to the guardian (of a woman),
     "Marry me to so-and-so," and the guardian
     remained silent or said to him, "What have you
     got?" And the other said, "I have so much and so
     much (Mahr)," or kept quiet, and then the
     guardian said, "I have married her to you," then
     the marriage is valid (legal). This narration was
     told by Sahl on the authority of the Prophet 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 71: 

     Narrated 'Ursa bin Az-Zubair: 

     that he asked 'Aisha, saying to her, "O Mother!
     (In what connection was this Verse revealed): 

     'If you fear that you shall not be able to deal
     justly with orphan girls (to the end of the verse)
     that your right hands possess?" (4.3) Aisha said,
     "O my nephew! It was about the female orphan
     under the protection of her guardian who was
     interested in her beauty and wealth and wanted
     to marry her with a little or reduced Mahr. So
     such guardians were forbidden to marry female
     orphans unless they deal with them justly and
     give their full Mahr; and they were ordered to
     marry women other than them."'Aisha added,
     "(Later) the people asked Allah's Apostle, for
     instructions, and then Allah revealed: 'They ask
     your instruction concerning the women . . . And
     yet whom you desire to marry.' (4.127) So Allah
     revealed to them in this Verse that-if a female
     orphan had wealth and beauty, they desired to
     marry her and were interested in her noble
     descent and the reduction of her Mahr; but if she
     was not desired by them because of her lack in
     fortune and beauty they left her and married
     some other woman. So, as they used to leave her
     when they had no interest in her, they had no
     right to marry her if they had the desire to do so,
     unless they deal justly with her and gave her a full
     amount of Mahr." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 72: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     A woman came to the Prophet,, and presented
     herself to him (for marriage). He said, "I am not
     in need of women these days." Then a man said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! Marry her to me." The
     Prophet asked him, "What have you got?" He
     said, "I have got nothing." The Prophet said,
     "Give her something, even an iron ring." He said,
     "I have got nothing." The Prophet asked (him),
     "How much of the Quran do you know (by
     heart)?" He said, "So much and so much." The
     Prophet said, "I have married her to you for what
     you know of the Quran." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 73: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet decreed that one should not try to
     cancel a bargain already agreed upon between
     some other persons (by offering a bigger price).
     And a man should not ask for the hand of a girl
     who is already engaged to his Muslim brother,
     unless the first suitor gives her up, or allows him
     to ask for her hand. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 74: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Beware of suspicion (about
     others), as suspicion is the falsest talk, and do
     not spy upon each other, and do not listen to the
     evil talk of the people about others' affairs, and
     do not have enmity with one another, but be
     brothers. And none should ask for the hand of a
     girl who is already engaged to his (Muslim)
     brother, but one should wait till the first suitor
     marries her or leaves her." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 75: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     "When Hafsa became a widow," Umar said, "I
     met Abu Bakr and said to him, 'If you wish I will
     marry Hafsa bint 'Umar to you.' I waited for a
     few days then Allah's Apostle asked for her
     hand. Later Abu Bakr met me and said, 'Nothing
     stopped me from returning to you concerning
     your offer except that I knew that Allah's Apostle
     had mentioned (his wish to marry) her, and I
     could never let out the secret of Allah's Apostle .
     If he had left her, I would have accepted her.' " 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 76: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Two men came from the east and delivered
     speeches, and the Prophet said, "Some eloquent
     speech has the in fluency of magic (e.g., some
     people refuse to do something and then a good
     eloquent speaker addresses them and then they
     agree to do that very thing after his speech). " 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 77: 

     Narrated Ar-Rabi': 

     (the daughter of Muawwidh bin Afra) After the
     consummation of my marriage, the Prophet came
     and sat on my bed as far from me as you are
     sitting now, and our little girls started beating the
     tambourines and reciting elegiac verses mourning
     my father who had been killed in the battle of
     Badr. One of them said, "Among us is a Prophet
     who knows what will happen tomorrow." On
     that the Prophet said, "Leave this (saying) and
     keep on saying the verses which you had been
     saying before." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 78: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Abdur Rahman bin 'Auf married a woman and
     gave her gold equal to the weight of a date stone
     (as Mahr). When the Prophet noticed the signs
     of cheerfulness of the marriage (on his face) and
     asked him about it, he said, "I have married a
     woman and gave (her) gold equal to a date stone
     in weight (as Mahr)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 79: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi: 

     While I was (sitting) among the people in the
     company of Allah's Apostle a woman stood up
     and said, "O Allah's Apostle! She has given
     herself in marriage to you; please give your
     opinion of her." The Prophet did not give her any
     reply. She again stood up and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! She has given herself (in marriage) to
     you; so please give your opinion of her. The
     Prophet did not give her any reply. She again
     stood up for the third time and said, "She has
     given herself in marriage to you: so give your
     opinion of her." So a man stood up and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Marry her to me." The Prophet
     asked him, "Have you got anything?" He said,
     "No." The Prophet said, "Go and search for
     something, even if it were an iron ring." The man
     went and searched and then returned saying, "I
     could not find anything, not even an iron ring."
     Then the Prophet said, "Do you know something
     of the Quran (by heart)?" He replied, "I know
     (by heart) such Sura and such Sura." The
     Prophet said, "Go! I have married her to you for
     what you know of the Quran (by heart)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 80: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     The Prophet said to a man, "Marry, even with (a
     Mahr equal to) an iron ring." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 81: 

     Narrated 'Uqba: 

     The Prophet said: "The stipulations most entitled
     to be abided by are those with which you are
     given the right to enjoy the (women's) private
     parts (i.e. the stipulations of the marriage
     contract)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 82: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "It is not lawful for a woman
     (at the time of wedding) to ask for the divorce of
     her sister (i.e. the other wife of her would-be
     husband) in order to have everything for herself,
     for she will take only what has been written for
     her." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 83: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf came to Allah's Apostle
     and he had marks of Sufra (yellow perfume).
     Allah's Apostle asked him (about those marks).
     'AbdurRahman bin Auf told him that he had
     married a woman from the Ansar. The Prophet
     asked, "How much Mahr did you pay her?" He
     said, "I paid gold equal to the weight of a date
     stone." Allah's Apostle said to him, "Give a
     wedding banquet, even if with one sheep." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 84: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet offered a wedding banquet on the
     occasion of his marriage to Zainab, and provided
     a good meal for the Muslims. Then he went out
     as was his custom on marrying, he came to the
     dwelling places of the mothers of the Believers
     (i.e. his wives) invoking good (on them), and they
     were invoking good (on him). Then he departed
     (and came back) and saw two men (still sitting
     there). So he left again. I do not remember
     whether I informed him or he was informed (by
     somebody else) of their departure)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 85: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet saw the traces of Sufra (yellow
     perfume) on Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and said,
     "What is this?" 'Abdur-Rahman, said, "I have
     married a woman and have paid gold equal to
     the weight of a datestone (as her Mahr). The
     Prophet said to him, "May Allah bless you: Offer
     a wedding banquet even with one sheep." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 86: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When the Prophet married me, my mother came
     to me and made me enter the house where I saw
     some women from the Ansar who said, "May
     you prosper and have blessings and have good
     omen." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 87: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A prophet among the
     prophets went for a military expedition and said
     to his people: "A man who has married a lady
     and wants to consummate his marriage with her
     and he has not done so yet, should not
     accompany me.' " 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 88: 

     Narrated 'Ursa: 

     The Prophet wrote the (marriage contract) with
     'Aisha while she was six years old and
     consummated his marriage with her while she
     was nine years old and she remained with him for
     nine years (i.e. till his death). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 89: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet stayed for three days at a place
     between Khaibar and Medina, and there he
     consummated his marriage with Safiyya bint
     Huyay. I invited the Muslims to a banquet which
     included neither meat nor bread. The Prophet
     ordered for the leather dining sheets to be
     spread, and then dates, dried yogurt and butter
     were provided over it, and that was the Walima
     (banquet) of the Prophet. The Muslims asked
     whether Safiyya would be considered as his wife
     or as a slave girl of what his right hands
     possessed. Then they said, "If the Prophet
     screens her from the people, then she Is the
     Prophet's wife but if he does not screen her, then
     she is a slave girl." So when the Prophet
     proceeded, he made a place for her (on the
     camel) behind him and screened her from
     people. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 90: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     When the Prophet married me, my mother came
     to me and made me enter the house (of the
     Prophet) and nothing surprised me but the
     coming of Allah's Apostle to me in the forenoon. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 91: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Did you get Anmat?" I
     said, 'O Allah's Apostle! From where can we
     have Anmat?" The Prophet said, "Soon you will
     have them Anmat) 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 92p: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     that she prepared a lady for a man from the
     Ansar as his bride and the Prophet said, "O
     'Aisha! Haven't you got any amusement (during
     the marriage ceremony) as the Ansar like
     amusement?" 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 92m: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     "Whenever the Prophet passed by (my mother
     Um-Sulaim) he used to enter her and greet her.
     Anas further said: Once the Prophet way a
     bridegroom during his marriage with Zainab, Um
     Sulaim said to me, "Let us give a gift to Allah's
     Apostle ." I said to her, "Do it." So she prepared
     Haisa (a sweet dish) made from dates, butter and
     dried yoghurt and she sent it with me to him. I
     took it to him and he said, "Put it down," and
     ordered me to call some men whom he named,
     and to invite whomever I would meet. I did what
     he ordered me to do, and when I returned, I
     found the house crowded with people and saw
     the Prophet keeping his hand over the Haisa and
     saying over it whatever Allah wished (him to
     say). Then he called the men in batches of ten to
     eat of it, and he said to them, "Mention the Name
     of Allah, and each man should eat of the dish the
     nearest to him." When all of them had finished
     their meals, some of them left and a few
     remained there talking, over which I felt unhappy.
     Then the Prophet went out towards the dwelling
     places (of his wives) and I too, went out after
     him and told him that those people had left. Then
     he returned and entered his dwelling place and let
     the curtains fall while I was in (his) dwelling
     place, and he was reciting the Verses:-- 'O you
     who believe! Enter not the Prophet's house until
     leave is given you for a meal, (and then) not (as
     early as) to what for its preparation. But when
     you are invited, enter, and when you have taken
     your meals, disperse without sitting for a talk.
     Verily such (behavior) annoys the Prophet; and
     he would be shy of (asking) you (to go), but
     Allah is not shy of (telling you) the Truth.'
     (33-53) Abu Uthman said: Anas said, "I served
     the Prophet for ten years." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 93: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     that she borrowed a necklace from Asma' and
     then it got lost. So Allah's Apostle 

     sent some people from his companions in search
     of it. In the meantime the stated time for the
     prayer became due and they offered their prayer
     without ablution. When they came to the
     Prophet, they complained about it to him, so the
     Verse regarding Tayammum was revealed . 

     Usaid bin Hudair said, "(O 'Aisha!) may Allah
     bless you with a good reward, for by Allah,
     never did a difficulty happen in connection with
     you, but Allah made an escape from it for you,
     and brought Allah's Blessings for the Muslims." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 94: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "If anyone of you, when having
     sexual intercourse with his wife, says: Bismillah,
     Allahumma jannibni-Sh-Shaitan wa
     jannib-ish-Shaitan ma razaqtana, and if it is
     destined that they should have a child, then Satan
     will never be able to harm him." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 95: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     I was ten years old when Allah's Apostle arrived
     at Medina. My mother and aunts used to urge
     me to serve the Prophet regularly, and I served
     him for ten years. When the Prophet died I was
     twenty years old, and I knew about the order of
     Al-Hijab (veiling of ladies) more than any other
     person when it was revealed. It was revealed for
     the first time when Allah's Apostle had
     consummated his marriage with Zainab bint
     Jahsh. When the day dawned, the Prophet was a
     bridegroom and he invited the people to a
     banquet, so they came, ate, and then all left
     except a few who remained with the Prophet for
     a long time. The Prophet got up and went out,
     and I too went out with him so that those people
     might leave too. The Prophet proceeded and so
     did I, till he came to the threshold of 'Aisha's
     dwelling place. Then thinking that these people
     have left by then, he returned and so did I along
     with him till he entered upon Zainab and behold,
     they were still sitting and had not gone. So the
     Prophet again went away and I went away along
     with him. When we reached the threshold of
     'Aisha's dwelling place, he thought that they had
     left, and so he returned and I too, returned along
     with him and found those people had left. Then
     the Prophet drew a curtain between me and him,
     and the Verses of Al-Hijab were revealed. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 96: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf married an
     Ansari woman, the Prophet asked him, "How
     much Mahr did you give her?" 'Abdur-Rahman
     said, "Gold equal to the weight of a date stone."
     Anas added: When they (i.e. the Prophet and his
     companions) arrived at Medina, the emigrants
     stayed at the Ansar's houses. 'Abdur-Rahman
     bin 'Auf stayed at Sad bin Ar-Rabi's house. Sad
     said to 'Abdur-Rahman, "I will divide and share
     my property with you and will give one of my
     two wives to you." 'Abdur-Rahman said, "May
     Allah bless you, your wives and property (I am
     not in need of that; but kindly show me the way
     to the market)." So 'Abdur-Rahman went to the
     market and traded there gaining a profit of some
     dried yoghurt and butter, and married (an Ansari
     woman). The Prophet said to him, "Give a
     banquet, even if with one sheep." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 97: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet did not give a better wedding
     banquet on the occasion of marrying any of his
     wives than the one he gave on marrying Zainab,
     and that banquet was with (consisted of) one
     sheep. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 98: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle manumitted Safiyya and then
     married her, and her Mahr was her manumission,
     and he gave a wedding banquet with Hais (a sort
     of sweet dish made from butter, cheese and
     dates). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 99: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet consummated his marriage with a
     woman (Zainab), so he sent me to invite men to
     the meals. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 100: 

     Narrated Thabit: 

     The marriage of Zainab bint Jahash was
     mentioned in the presence of Anas and he said,
     "I did not see the Prophet giving a better banquet
     on marrying any of his wives than the one he
     gave on marrying Zainab. He then gave a
     banquet with one sheep." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 101: 

     Narrated Safiyya bint Shaiba: 

     The Prophet gave a banquet with two Mudds of
     barley on marrying some of his wives. (1 Mudd=
     1 3/4 of a kilogram) . 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 102: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you is invites
     to a wedding banquet, he must go for it (accept
     the invitation) ." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 103: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "Set the captives free, accept
     the invitation (to a wedding banquet), and visit
     the patients." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 104: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     The Prophet ordered us to do seven (things) and
     forbade us from seven. He ordered us to visit the
     patients, to follow the funeral procession, to reply
     to the sneezer (i.e., say to him, 'Yarhamuka-l-lah
     (May Allah bestow His Mercy upon you), if he
     says 'Al-hamdulillah' (Praise be to Allah), to help
     others to fulfill their oaths, to help the oppressed,
     to greet (whomever one should meet), and to
     accept the invitation (to a wedding banquet). He
     forbade us to wear golden rings, to use silver
     utensils, to use Mayathir (cushions of silk stuffed
     with cotton and placed under the rider on the
     saddle), the Qasiyya (linen clothes containing silk
     brought from an Egyptian town), the Istibraq
     (thick silk) and the Dibaj (another kind of silk).
     (See Hadith No. 539 and 753). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 105: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     Abu Usaid As-Sa'di invited Allah's Apostle to his
     wedding party and his wife who was the bride,
     served them on that day. Do you know what
     drink she gave Allah's Apostle? She had soaked
     some dates for him (in water) overnight, and
     when he had finished his meal she gave him that
     drink (of soaked dates). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 106: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The worst food is that of a wedding banquet to
     which only the rich are invited while the poor are
     not invited. And he who refuses an invitation (to
     a banquet) disobeys Allah and His Apostle . 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 107: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "If I am invited to a meal of
     trotters I will accept it; and if I am given a trotter
     as a present I will accept it." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 108: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said,
     'Accept the marriage invitation if you are invited
     to it.' " Ibn 'Umar used to accept the invitation
     whether to a wedding banquet or to any other
     party, even when he was fasting. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 109: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once the Prophet saw some women and children
     coming from a wedding party. He got up
     energetically and happily and said, "By Allah!
     You (i.e., the Ansar) are the most beloved of all
     people to me." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 110: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) I bought a cushion
     having on it pictures (of animals). When Allah's
     Apostle saw it, he stood at the door and did not
     enter. I noticed the sign of disapproval on his
     face and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I repent to
     Allah and His Apostle. What sin have I
     committed?' Allah's Apostle said. "What is this
     cushion?" I said, "I have bought it for you so that
     you may sit on it and recline on it." Allah's
     Apostle said, "The makers of these pictures will
     be punished on the Day of Resurrection, and it
     will be said to them, 'Give life to what you have
     created (i.e., these pictures).' " The Prophet
     added, "The Angels of (Mercy) do not enter a
     house in which there are pictures (of animals)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 111: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     When Abu Usaid As-Sa'idi got married, he
     invited the Prophet and his companions. None
     prepared the food for them and brought it to
     them but his wife. She soaked some dates in
     water in a stone pot overnight, and when the
     Prophet had finished his food, she provided him
     with that drink (of soaked dates). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 112: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     Abu Usaid As-Sa'idi invited the Prophet to his
     wedding party and his wife served him on that
     day, and she was the bride. She said (or Sahl
     said), "Do you know what she soaked for Allah's
     Apostle? She soaked some dates for him (in
     water) in a drinking bowl overnight." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 113: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The woman is like a rib; if
     you try to straighten her, she will break. So if you
     want to get benefit from her, do so while she still
     has some crookedness." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 114: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever believes in Allah
     and the Last Day should not hurt (trouble) his
     neighbor. And I advise you to take care of the
     women, for they are created from a rib and the
     most crooked portion of the rib is its upper part;
     if you try to straighten it, it will break, and if you
     leave it, it will remain crooked, so I urge you to
     take care of the women." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 115: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     During the lifetime of the Prophet we used to
     avoid chatting leisurely and freely with our wives
     lest some Divine inspiration might be revealed
     concerning us. But when the Prophet had died,
     we started chatting leisurely and freely (with
     them). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 116: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "Everyone of you is a guardian
     and everyone of you is responsible (for his
     wards). A ruler is a guardian and is
     responsible(for his subjects); a man is a guardian
     of his family and responsible (for them); a wife is
     a guardian of her husband's house and she is
     responsible (for it), a slave is a guardian of his
     master's property and is responsible (for that).
     Beware! All of you are guardians and are
     responsible (for your wards)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 117: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Eleven women sat (at a place) and promised and
     contracted that they would not conceal anything
     of the news of their husbands. The first one said,
     "My husband is like the meat of a lean weak
     camel which is kept on the top of a mountain
     which is neither easy to climb, nor is the meat fat,
     so that one might put up with the trouble of
     fetching it." The second one said, "I shall not
     relate my husband's news, for I fear that I may
     not be able to finish his story, for if I describe
     him, I will mention all his defects and bad traits."
     The third one said, "My husband is a tall man; if I
     describe him (and he hears of that) he will
     divorce me, and if I keep quiet, he will neither
     divorce me nor treat me as a wife." The fourth
     one said, "My husband is a moderate person like
     the night of Tihama which is neither hot nor cold.
     I am neither afraid of him, nor am I discontented
     with him." The fifth one said, "My husband, when
     entering (the house) is a leopard, and when going
     out, is a lion. He does not ask about whatever is
     in the house." The sixth one said, "If my husband
     eats. he eats too much (leaving the dishes
     empty), and if he drinks he leaves nothing, and if
     he sleeps he sleeps alone (away from me)
     covered in garments and does not stretch his
     hands here and there so as to know how I fare
     (get along)." The seventh one said, "My husband
     is a wrong-doer or weak and foolish. All the
     defects are present in him. He may injure your
     head or your body or may do both." The eighth
     one said, "My husband is soft to touch like a
     rabbit and smells like a Zarnab (a kind of good
     smelling grass)." The ninth one said, "My
     husband is a tall generous man wearing a long
     strap for carrying his sword. His ashes are
     abundant and his house is near to the people who
     would easily consult him." The tenth one said,
     "My husband is Malik, and what is Malik? Malik
     is greater than whatever I say about him. (He is
     beyond and above all praises which can come to
     my mind). Most of his camels are kept at home
     (ready to be slaughtered for the guests) and only
     a few are taken to the pastures. When the camels
     hear the sound of the lute (or the tambourine)
     they realize that they are going to be slaughtered
     for the guests." The eleventh one said, "My
     husband is Abu Zar and what is Abu Zar (i.e.,
     what should I say about him)? He has given me
     many ornaments and my ears are heavily loaded
     with them and my arms have become fat (i.e., I
     have become fat). And he has pleased me, and I
     have become so happy that I feel proud of
     myself. He found me with my family who were
     mere owners of sheep and living in poverty, and
     brought me to a respected family having horses
     and camels and threshing and purifying grain .
     Whatever I say, he does not rebuke or insult me.
     When I sleep, I sleep till late in the morning, and
     when I drink water (or milk), I drink my fill. The
     mother of Abu Zar and what may one say in
     praise of the mother of Abu Zar? Her saddle
     bags were always full of provision and her house
     was spacious. As for the son of Abu Zar, what
     may one say of the son of Abu Zar? His bed is
     as narrow as an unsheathed sword and an arm of
     a kid (of four months) satisfies his hunger. As for
     the daughter of Abu Zar, she is obedient to her
     father and to her mother. She has a fat well-built
     body and that arouses the jealousy of her
     husband's other wife. As for the (maid) slave girl
     of Abu Zar, what may one say of the (maid)
     slavegirl of Abu Zar? She does not uncover our
     secrets but keeps them, and does not waste our
     provisions and does not leave the rubbish
     scattered everywhere in our house." The eleventh
     lady added, "One day it so happened that Abu
     Zar went out at the time when the milk was being
     milked from the animals, and he saw a woman
     who had two sons like two leopards playing with
     her two breasts. (On seeing her) he divorced me
     and married her. Thereafter I married a noble
     man who used to ride a fast tireless horse and
     keep a spear in his hand. He gave me many
     things, and also a pair of every kind of livestock
     and said, 'Eat (of this), O Um Zar, and give
     provision to your relatives." She added, "Yet, all
     those things which my second husband gave me
     could not fill the smallest utensil of Abu Zar's."
     'Aisha then said: Allah's Apostle said to me, "I
     am to you as Abu Zar was to his wife Um Zar." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 118: 

     Narrated 'Ursa: 

     Aisha said, "While the Ethiopians were playing
     with their small spears, Allah's Apostle screened
     me behind him and I watched (that display) and
     kept on watching till I left on my own." So you
     may estimate of what age a little girl may listen to
     amusement. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 119: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas : 

     I had been eager to ask 'Umar bin Al-Khattab
     about the two ladies from among the wives of the
     Prophet regarding whom Allah said 'If you two
     (wives of the Prophet namely Aisha and Hafsa)
     turn in repentance to Allah, your hearts are
     indeed so inclined (to oppose what the Prophet
     likes). (66.4) till 'Umar performed the Hajj and I
     too, performed the Hajj along with him. (On the
     way) 'Umar went aside to answer the call of
     nature, and I also went aside along with him
     carrying a tumbler full of water, and when 'Umar
     had finished answering the call of nature, I
     poured water over his hands and he performed
     the ablution. Then I said to him, "O chief of the
     Believers! Who were the two ladies from among
     the wives of the Prophet regarding whom Allah
     said: 'If you two (wives of the Prophet) turn in
     repentance to Allah your hearts are indeed so
     inclined (to oppose what the Prophet likes)?"
     (66.4) He said, "I am astonished at your
     question, O Ibn Abbas. They were 'Aisha and
     Hafsa." Then 'Umar went on narrating the Hadith
     and said, "I and an Ansari neighbor of mine from
     Bani Umaiyya bin Zaid who used to live in
     Awali-al-Medina, used to visit the Prophet in
     turn. He used to go one day and I another day.
     When I went, I would bring him the news of
     what had happened that day regarding the Divine
     Inspiration and other things, and when he went,
     he used to do the same for me. We, the people
     of Quraish used to have the upper hand over our
     wives, but when we came to the Ansar, we
     found that their women had the upper hand over
     their men, so our women also started learning the
     ways of the Ansari women. I shouted at my wife
     and she retorted against me and I disliked that
     she should answer me back. She said to me,
     'Why are you so surprised at my answering you
     back? By Allah, the wives of the Prophet answer
     him back and some of them may leave (does not
     speak to) him throughout the day till the night.'
     The (talk) scared me and I said to her, 'Whoever
     has done so will be ruined!' Then I proceeded
     after dressing myself, and entered upon Hafsa
     and said to her, 'Does anyone of you keep the
     Prophet angry till night?' She said, 'Yes.' I said,
     'You are a ruined losing person! Don't you fear
     that Allah may get angry for the anger of Allah's
     Apostle and thus you will be ruined? So do not
     ask more from the Prophet and do not answer
     him back and do not give up talking to him. Ask
     me whatever you need and do not be tempted to
     imitate your neighbor (i.e., 'Aisha) in her manners
     for she is more charming than you and more
     beloved to the Prophet ." Umar added,"At that
     time a talk was circulating among us that (the
     tribe of) Ghassan were preparing their horses to
     invade us. My Ansari companion, on the day of
     his turn, went (to the town) and returned to us at
     night and knocked at my door violently and
     asked if I was there. I became horrified and
     came out to him. He said, 'Today a great thing
     has happened.' I asked, 'What is it? Have (the
     people of) Ghassan come?' He said, 'No, but
     (What has happened) is greater and more
     horrifying than that: Allah's Apostle; has divorced
     his wives. 'Umar added, "The Prophet kept away
     from his wives and I said "Hafsa is a ruined
     loser.' I had already thought that most probably
     this (divorce) would happen in the near future.
     So I dressed myself and offered the morning
     prayer with the Prophet and then the Prophet;
     entered an upper room and stayed there in
     seclusion. I entered upon Hafsa and saw her
     weeping. I asked, 'What makes you weep? Did I
     not warn you about that? Did the Prophet
     divorce you all?' She said, 'I do not know. There
     he is retired alone in the upper room.' I came out
     and sat near the pulpit and saw a group of
     people sitting around it and some of them were
     weeping. I sat with them for a while but could not
     endure the situation, so I went to the upper room
     where the Prophet; was and said to a black slave
     of his, 'Will you get the permission (of the
     Prophet ) for 'Umar (to enter)?' The slave went
     in, talked to the Prophet about it and then
     returned saying, 'I have spoken to the Prophet
     and mentioned you but he kept quiet.' Then I
     returned and sat with the group of people sitting
     near the pulpit. but I could not bear the situation
     and once again I said to the slave, 'Will you get
     the permission for 'Umar?' He went in and
     returned saying, 'I mentioned you to him but he
     kept quiet.' So I returned again and sat with the
     group of people sitting near the pulpit, but I could
     not bear the situation, and so I went to the slave
     and said, 'Will you get the permission for 'Umar?'
     He went in and returned to me saying, 'I
     mentioned you to him but he kept quiet.' When I
     was leaving, behold! The slave called me, saying,
     'The Prophet has given you permission.' Then I
     entered upon Allah's Apostle and saw him Lying
     on a bed made of stalks of date palm leaves and
     there was no bedding between it and him. The
     stalks left marks on his side and he was leaning
     on a leather pillow stuffed with date-palm fires. I
     greeted him and while still standing I said, 'O
     Allah's Apostle! Have you divorced your wives?'
     He looked at me and said, 'No.' I said, 'Allah
     Akbar!' And then, while still standing, I said
     chatting, 'Will you heed what I say, O Allah's
     Apostle? We, the people of Quraish used to
     have power over our women, but when we
     arrived at Medina we found that the men (here)
     were overpowered by their women.' The
     Prophet smiled and then I said to him, 'Will you
     heed what I say, O Allah's Apostle? I entered
     upon Hafsa and said to her, "Do not be tempted
     to imitate your companion ('Aisha), for she is
     more charming than you and more beloved to the
     Prophet.' " The Prophet smiled for a second
     time. When I saw him smiling, I sat down. Then I
     looked around his house, and by Allah, I could
     not see anything of importance in his house
     except three hides, so I said, 'O Allah's Apostle!
     Invoke Allah to make your followers rich, for the
     Persians and the Romans have been made
     prosperous and they have been given (the
     pleasures of the world), although they do not
     worship Allah.' Thereupon the Prophet sat up as
     he was reclining. and said, 'Are you of such an
     opinion, O the son of Al-Khattab? These are the
     people who have received the rewards for their
     good deeds in this world.' I said, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! Ask Allah to forgive me.' Then the
     Prophet kept away from his wives for
     twenty-nine days because of the story which
     Hafsa had disclosed to 'Aisha. The Prophet had
     said, 'I will not enter upon them (my wives) for
     one month,' because of his anger towards them,
     when Allah had admonished him. So, when
     twenty nine days had passed, the Prophet first
     entered upon 'Aisha. 'Aisha said to him, 'O
     Allah's Apostle! You had sworn that you would
     not enter upon us for one month, but now only
     twenty-nine days have passed, for I have been
     counting them one by one.' The Prophet said,
     'The (present) month is of twenty nine days.'
     'Aisha added, 'Then Allah revealed the Verses of
     the option. (2) And out of all his-wives he asked
     me first, and I chose him.' Then he gave option to
     his other wives and they said what 'Aisha had
     said . " (1) The Prophet, ' had decided to abstain
     from eating a certain kind of food because of a
     certain event, so Allah blamed him for doing so.
     Some of his wives were the cause of him taking
     that decision, therefore he deserted them for one
     month. See Quran: (66.4) 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 120: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A woman should not fast
     (optional fasts) except with her husband's
     permission if he is at home (staying with her)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 121: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "If a man Invites his wife to
     sleep with him and she refuses to come to him,
     then the angels send their curses on her till
     morning." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 122: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "If a woman spends the night
     deserting her husband's bed (does not sleep with
     him), then the angels send their curses on her till
     she comes back (to her husband)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 123: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "It is not lawful for a lady to
     fast (Nawafil) without the permission of her
     husband when he is at home; and she should not
     allow anyone to enter his house except with his
     permission; and if she spends of his wealth (on
     charitable purposes) without being ordered by
     him, he will get half of the reward." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 124: 

     Narrated Usama: 

     The Prophet said, "I stood at the gate of
     Paradise and saw that the majority of the people
     who entered it were the poor, while the wealthy
     were stopped at the gate (for the accounts). But
     the companions of the Fire were ordered to be
     taken to the Fire. Then I stood at the gate of the
     Fire and saw that the majority of those who
     entered it were women." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 125: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas: 

     During the lifetime of Allah's Apostle, the sun
     eclipsed. Allah's Apostle offered the prayer of
     (the) eclipse) and so did the people along with
     him. He performed a long Qiyam (standing
     posture) during which Surat-al-Baqara could
     have been recited; then he performed a
     pro-longed bowing, then raised his head and
     stood for a long time which was slightly less than
     that of the first Qiyam (and recited Qur'an). Then
     he performed a prolonged bowing again but the
     period was shorter than the period of the first
     bowing, then he stood up and then prostrated.
     Again he stood up, but this time the period of
     standing was less than the first standing. Then he
     performed a prolonged bowing but of a lesser
     duration than the first, then he stood up again for
     a long time but for a lesser duration than the first.
     Then he performed a prolonged bowing but of
     lesser duration than the first, and then he again
     stood up, and then prostrated and then finished
     his prayer. By then the sun eclipse had cleared.
     The Prophet then said, "The sun and the moon
     are two signs among the signs of Allah, and they
     do not eclipse because of the death or birth of
     someone, so when you observe the eclipse,
     remember Allah (offer the eclipse prayer)." They
     (the people) said, "O Allah's Apostle! We saw
     you stretching your hand to take something at this
     place of yours, then we saw you stepping
     backward." He said, "I saw Paradise (or
     Paradise was shown to me), and I stretched my
     hand to pluck a bunch (of grapes), and had I
     plucked it, you would have eaten of it as long as
     this world exists. Then I saw the (Hell) Fire, and
     I have never before, seen such a horrible sight as
     that, and I saw that the majority of its dwellers
     were women." The people asked, "O Allah's
     Apostle! What is the reason for that?" He
     replied, "Because of their ungratefulness." It was
     said. "Do they disbelieve in Allah (are they
     ungrateful to Allah)?" He replied, "They are not
     thankful to their husbands and are ungrateful for
     the favors done to them. Even if you do good to
     one of them all your life, when she seems some
     harshness from you, she will say, "I have never
     seen any good from you.' " 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 126: 

     Narrated Imran: 

     The Prophet said, "I looked at Paradise and saw
     that the majority of its residents were the poor;
     and I looked at the (Hell) Fire and saw that the
     majority of its residents were women." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 127: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "O 'Abdullah! Have I not
     been formed that you fast all the day and stand in
     prayer all night?" I said, "Yes, O Allah's
     Apostle!" He said, "Do not do that! Observe the
     fast sometimes and also leave them (the fast) at
     other times; stand up for the prayer at night and
     also sleep at night. Your body has a right over
     you, your eyes have a right over you and your
     wife has a right over you." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 128: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "All of you are guardians and
     are responsible for your wards. The ruler is a
     guardian and the man is a guardian of his family;
     the lady is a guardian and is responsible for her
     husband's house and his offspring; and so all of
     you are guardians and are responsible for your
     wards." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 129: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle took an oath that he would not
     visit his wives for one month, and he sat in an
     upper room belonging to him. Then, on the
     twenty ninth day he came down. It was said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! You had taken an oath not to
     visit your wives for one month." He said, "The
     (present) month is of twenty-nine days." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 130: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     The Prophet took an oath that he would not
     enter upon some of his wives for one month. But
     when twenty nine days had elapsed, he went to
     them in the morning or evening. It was said to
     him, "O Allah's Prophet! You had taken an oath
     that you would not enter upon them for one
     month." He replied, "The month can be of twenty
     nine days." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 131: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     One morning we saw the wives of the Prophet
     weeping, and everyone of them had her family
     with her, I went to the mosque and found that it
     was crowded with people. Then 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab came and went up to the Prophet
     who was in his upper room. He greeted him but
     nobody answered. He greeted again, but nobody
     answered. Then the gatekeeper called him and
     he entered upon the Prophet, and asked, "Have
     you divorced your wives?" The Prophet, said,
     "No, but I have taken an oath not to go to them
     for one month." So the Prophet stayed away
     (from his wives) for twenty nine days and then
     entered upon them. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 132: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zam'a: 

     The Prophet said, "None of you should flog his
     wife as he flogs a slave and then have sexual
     intercourse with her in the last part of the day." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 133: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     An Ansari woman gave her daughter in marriage
     and the hair of the latter started falling out. The
     Ansari women came to the Prophet and
     mentioned that to him and said, "Her (my
     daughter's) husband suggested that I should let
     her wear false hair." The Prophet said, "No,
     (don't do that) for Allah sends His curses upon
     such ladies who lengthen their hair artificially." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 134: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     regarding the Verse: 'If a wife fears cruelty or
     desertion on her husband's part ...') (4.128) It
     concerns the woman whose husband does not
     want to keep her with him any longer, but wants
     to divorce her and marry some other lady, so she
     says to him: 'Keep me and do not divorce me,
     and then marry another woman, and you may
     neither spend on me, nor sleep with me.' This is
     indicated by the Statement of Allah: 'There is no
     blame on them if they arrange an amicable
     settlement between them both, and (such)
     settlement is better." (4.128) 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 135: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     We used to practice coitus interrupt us during the
     lifetime of Allah's Apostle . 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 136: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     We used to practice coitus interrupt us while the
     Quran was being revealed. Jabir added: We
     used to practice coitus interrupt us during the
     lifetime of Allah's Apostle while the Quran was
     being Revealed. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 137: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     We got female captives in the war booty and we
     used to do coitus interruptus with them. So we
     asked Allah's Apostle about it and he said, "Do
     you really do that?" repeating the question thrice,
     "There is no soul that is destined to exist but will
     come into existence, till the Day of Resurrection."


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 138: 

     Narrated al-Qasim: 

     Aisha said that whenever the Prophet intended to
     go on a journey, he drew lots among his wives
     (so as to take one of them along with him).
     During one of his journeys the lot fell on 'Aisha
     and Hafsa. When night fell the Prophet would
     ride beside 'Aisha and talk with her. One night
     Hafsa said to 'Aisha, "Won't you ride my camel
     tonight and I ride yours, so that you may see
     (me) and I see (you) (in new situation)?" 'Aisha
     said, "Yes, (I agree.)" So 'Aisha rode, and then
     the Prophet came towards 'Aisha's camel on
     which Hafsa was riding. He greeted Hafsa and
     then proceeded (beside her) till they dismounted
     (on the way). 'Aisha missed him, and so, when
     they dismounted, she put her legs in the Idhkhir
     and said, "O Lord (Allah)! Send a scorpion or a
     snake to bite me for I am not to blame him (the
     Prophet ). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 139: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Sada bint Zam'a gave up her turn to me ('Aisha),
     and so the Prophet used to give me ('Aisha) both
     my day and the day of Sad; 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 140: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The tradition, (of the Prophet) is that if someone
     marries a virgin and he has already a matron wife
     (with him), then he should stay with the virgin for
     seven days; and if someone marries a matron
     (and he has already a virgin wife with him) then
     he should stay with her for three days. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 141: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     It is the Prophet's tradition that if someone
     marries a virgin and he has already a matron wife
     then he should stay for seven days with her (the
     virgin) and then by turns; and if someone marries
     a matron and he has already a virgin wife then he
     should stay with her (the matron) for three days,
     and then by turns. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 142: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet used to pass by (have sexual
     relation with) all his wives in one night, and at that
     time he had nine wives. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 143: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle finished his 'Asr
     prayer, he would enter upon his wives and stay
     with one of them. One day he went to Hafsa and
     stayed with her longer than usual. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 144: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     that during his fatal ailment, Allah's Apostle, used
     to ask his wives, "Where shall I stay tomorrow?
     Where shall I stay tomorrow?" He was looking
     forward to Aisha's turn. So all his wives allowed
     him to stay where he wished, and he stayed at
     'Aisha's house till he died there. 'Aisha added: He
     died on the day of my usual turn at my house.
     Allah took him unto Him while his head was
     between my chest and my neck and his saliva
     was mixed with my saliva. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 145: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     that 'Umar entered upon Hafsa and said, "O my
     daughter! Do not be misled by the manners of
     her who is proud of her beauty because of the
     love of Allah's Apostle for her." By 'her' he
     meant 'Aisha. 'Umar added, "Then I told that to
     Allah's Apostle and he smiled (on hearing that)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 146: 

     Narrated Asma: 

     Some lady said, "O Allah's Apostle! My husband
     has another wife, so it is sinful of me to claim that
     he has given me what he has not given me (in
     order to tease her)?" Allah's Apostle said, The
     one who pretends that he has been given what he
     has not been given, is just like the (false) one
     who wears two garments of falsehood." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 147: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud: 

     The Prophet, said, "There is none having a
     greater sense of Ghira than Allah. And for that
     He has forbidden the doing of evil actions (illegal
     sexual intercourse etc.) There is none who likes
     to be praised more than Allah does." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 148: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "O followers of
     Muhammad! There is none, who has a greater
     sense of Ghira (self-respect) than Allah, so He
     has forbidden that His slave commits illegal
     sexual intercourse or His slave girl commits illegal
     sexual intercourse. O followers of Muhammad! If
     you but knew what I know, you would laugh less
     and weep more!" 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 149: 

     Narrated Asma': 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "There is nothing
     (none) having a greater sense of Ghira
     (self-respect) than Allah." And narrated Abu
     Huraira that he heard the Prophet (saying the
     same). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 150: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet; said, "Allah has a sense of Ghira,
     and Allah's sense of Ghira is provoked when a
     believer does something which Allah has
     prohibited." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 151: 

     Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr: 

     When Az-Zubair married me, he had no real
     property or any slave or anything else except a
     camel which drew water from the well, and his
     horse. I used to feed his horse with fodder and
     drew water and sew the bucket for drawing it,
     and prepare the dough, but I did not know how
     to bake bread. So our Ansari neighbors used to
     bake bread for me, and they were honorable
     ladies. I used to carry the date stones on my
     head from Zubair's land given to him by Allah's
     Apostle and this land was two third Farsakh
     (about two miles) from my house. One day,
     while I was coming with the date stones on my
     head, I met Allah's Apostle along with some
     Ansari people. He called me and then, (directing
     his camel to kneel down) said, "Ikh! Ikh!" so as
     to make me ride behind him (on his camel). I felt
     shy to travel with the men and remembered
     Az-Zubair and his sense of Ghira, as he was one
     of those people who had the greatest sense of
     Ghira. Allah's Apostle noticed that I felt shy, so
     he proceeded. I came to Az-Zubair and said, "I
     met Allah's Apostle while I was carrying a load
     of date stones on my head, and he had some
     companions with him. He made his camel kneel
     down so that I might ride, but I felt shy in his
     presence and remembered your sense of Ghira
     (See the glossary). On that Az-Zubair said, "By
     Allah, your carrying the date stones (and you
     being seen by the Prophet in such a state) is
     more shameful to me than your riding with him."
     (I continued serving in this way) till Abu Bakr
     sent me a servant to look after the horse,
     whereupon I felt as if he had set me free. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 152: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     While the Prophet was in the house of one of his
     wives, one of the mothers of the believers sent a
     meal in a dish. The wife at whose house the
     Prophet was, struck the hand of the servant,
     causing the dish to fall and break. The Prophet
     gathered the broken pieces of the dish and then
     started collecting on them the food which had
     been in the dish and said, "Your mother (my
     wife) felt jealous." Then he detained the servant
     till a (sound) dish was brought from the wife at
     whose house he was. He gave the sound dish to
     the wife whose dish had been broken and kept
     the broken one at the house where it had been
     broken. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 153: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet, said, "I entered Paradise and saw a
     palace and asked whose palace is this? They (the
     Angels) said, "This palace belongs to 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab.' I intended to enter it, and nothing
     stopped me except my knowledge about your
     sense of Ghira (self-respect (O Umar)." 'Umar
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! Let my father and
     mother be sacrificed for you! O Allah's Prophet!
     How dare I think of my Ghira (self-respect)
     being offended by you?" 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 154: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     While we were sitting with Allah's Apostle, (he)
     Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, I
     saw a woman performing ablution beside a
     palace. I asked, "Whose palace is this?' It was
     said, 'This palace belongs to 'Umar.' Then I
     remembered his sense of Ghira and returned."
     On that 'Umar started weeping in that gathering
     and said, "O Allah's Apostle! How dare I think
     of my self-respect being offended by you?" 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 155: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     That Allah's Apostle said to her, "I you are
     pleased with me or angry with me." I said,
     "Whence do you know that?" He said, "When
     you are pleased with me, you say, 'No, by the
     Lord of Muhammad,' but when you are angry
     with me, then you say, 'No, by the Lord of
     Abraham.' " Thereupon I said, "Yes (you are
     right), but by Allah, O Allah's Apostle, I leave
     nothing but your name." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 156: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I never felt so jealous of any wife of Allah's
     Apostle as I did of Khadija because Allah's
     Apostle used to remember and praise her too
     often and because it was revealed to Allah's
     Apostle that he should give her (Khadija) the
     glad tidings of her having a palace of Qasab in
     Paradise . 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 157: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle who was on the pulpit,
     saying, "Banu Hisham bin Al-Mughira have
     requested me to allow them to marry their
     daughter to Ali bin Abu Talib, but I don't give
     permission, and will not give permission unless
     'Ali bin Abi Talib divorces my daughter in order
     to marry their daughter, because Fatima is a part
     of my body, and I hate what she hates to see,
     and what hurts her, hurts me." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 158: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I will narrate to you a Habith I heard from Allah's
     Apostle and none other than I will tell you of it. I
     heard Allah's Apostle saying, "From among the
     portents of the Hour are the following: Religious
     knowledge will be taken away; General
     ignorance (in religious matters) will increase;
     illegal Sexual intercourse will prevail: Drinking of
     alcoholic drinks will prevail. Men will decrease in
     number, and women will increase in number, so
     much so that fifty women will be looked after by
     one man." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 159: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Beware of entering upon
     the ladies." A man from the Ansar said, "Allah's
     Apostle! What about Al-Hamu the in-laws of the
     wife (the brothers of her husband or his nephews
     etc.)?" The Prophet replied: The in-laws of the
     wife are death itself. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 160: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas : 

     The Prophet said, "No man should stay with a
     lady in seclusion except in the presence of a
     Dhu-Muhram." A man stood up and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! My wife has gone out intending
     to perform the Hajj and I have been enrolled (in
     the army) for such-and-such campaign." The
     Prophet said, "Return and perform the Hajj with
     your wife." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 161: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     An Ansari woman came to the Prophet and he
     took her aside and said (to her). "By Allah, you
     (Ansar) are the most beloved people to me." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 162: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     that while the Prophet was with her, there was an
     effeminate man in the house. The effeminate man
     said to Um Salama's brother, 'Abdullah bin Abi
     Umaiyya, "If Allah should make you conquer
     Ta'if tomorrow, I recommend that you take the
     daughter of Ghailan (in marriage) for (she is so
     fat) that she shows four folds of flesh when facing
     you and eight when she turns her back."
     Thereupon the Prophet said (to us), "This
     (effeminate man) should not enter upon you
     (anymore)." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 163: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet was screening me with his Rida'
     (garment covering the upper part of the body)
     while I was looking at the Ethiopians who were
     playing in the courtyard of the mosque. (I
     continued watching) till I was satisfied. So you
     may deduce from this event how a little girl (who
     has not reached the age of puberty) who is eager
     to enjoy amusement should be treated in this
     respect. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 164: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Once Sada bint Zam'a went out at night for some
     need, and 'Umar saw her, and recognizing her,
     he said (to her), "By Allah, O Sada! You cannot
     hide yourself from us." So she returned to the
     Prophet and mentioned that to him while he was
     sitting in my dwelling taking his supper and
     holding a bone covered with meat in his hand.
     Then the Divine Inspiration was revealed to him
     and when that state was over, he (the Prophet
     was saying: "O women! You have been allowed
     by Allah to go out for your needs." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 165: 

     Narrated Salim's father: 

     The Prophet said, "If the wife of anyone of you
     asks permission to go to the mosque, he should
     not forbid her." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 166: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     My foster uncle came and asked permission (to
     enter) but I refused to admit him till I asked
     Allah's Apostle about that. He said, "He is your
     uncle, so allow him to come in." I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I have been suckled by a woman and
     not by a man." Allah's Apostle said, "He is your
     uncle, so let him enter upon you." And that
     happened after the order of Al-Hijab
     (compulsory veiling) was revealed. All things
     which become unlawful because of blood
     relations are unlawful because of the
     corresponding foster suckling relations. 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 167: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet said, "A woman should not look at
     or touch another woman to describe her to her 

     husband in such a way as if he was actually
     looking at her." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 168: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "A woman should not look at
     or touch another woman to describe her to her
     husband in such a way as if he was actually
     looking at her." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 169: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     (The Prophet) Solomon son of (the Prophet)
     David said, "Tonight I will go round (i.e. have
     sexual relations with) one hundred women (my
     wives) everyone of whom will deliver a male
     child who will fight in Allah's Cause." On that an
     Angel said to him, "Say: 'If Allah will.' " But
     Solomon did not say it and forgot to say it. Then
     he had sexual relations with them but none of
     them delivered any child except one who
     delivered a half person. The Prophet said, "If
     Solomon had said: 'If Allah will,' Allah would
     have fulfilled his (above) desire and that saying
     would have made him more hopeful." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 170: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     The Prophet disliked that one should go to one's
     family at night (on returning from a journey). 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 171: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When anyone of you is
     away from his house for a long time, he should
     not return to his family at night." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 172: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     I was with Allah's Apostle in a Ghazwa, and
     when we returned, I wanted to hurry, while riding
     a slow camel. A rider came behind me. I looked
     back and saw that the rider was Allah's Apostle .
     He said (to me), "What makes you in such a
     hurry?" I replied, "I am newly married." He said,
     "Did you marry a virgin or a matron?" I replied,
     "(Not a virgin but) a matron." He said, "Why
     didn't you marry a young girl with whom you
     could play and who could play with you?" Then
     when we approached (Medina) and were going
     to enter (it), the Prophet said, "Wait till you enter
     (your homes) at night (in the first part of the
     night) so that the ladies with unkempt hair may
     comb their hair, and those whose husbands have
     been absent (for a long time) may shave their
     pubic hair." (The sub-narrator, Hashim said: A
     reliable narrator told me that the Prophet added
     in this Hadith: "(Seek to beget) children!
     Children, O Jabir!") 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 173: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "If you enter (your town) at
     night (after coming from a journey), do not enter
     upon your family till the woman whose husband
     was absent (from the house) shaves her pubic
     hair and the woman with unkempt hair, combs
     her hair" Allah's Apostle further said, "(O Jabir!)
     Seek to have offspring, seek to have offspring!" 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 174: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     We were with the Prophet in Ghazwa, and when
     we returned and approached Medina, I wanted
     to hurry while riding a slow camel. A rider
     overtook me and pricked my camel with a spear
     which he had, whereupon my camel started
     running as fast as any other fast camel you may
     see. I looked back, and behold, the rider was
     Allah's Apostle . I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I am
     newly married " He asked, "Have you got
     married?" I replied, "Yes." He said, "A virgin or a
     matron?" I replied, "(Not a virgin) but a matron"
     He said, "Why didn't you marry a young girl so
     that you could play with her and she with you?"
     When we reached (near Medina) and were going
     to enter it, the Prophet said, "Wait till you enter
     your home early in the night so that the lady
     whose hair is unkempt may comb her hair and
     that the lady whose husband has been away may
     shave her pubic hair." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 175: 

     Narrated Abu Hazim: 

     The people differed about the type of treatment
     which had been given to Allah's Apostle on the
     day (of the battle) of Uhud. So they asked Sahl
     bin Sad As-Sa'id who was the only surviving
     Companion (of the Prophet) at Medina. He
     replied, "Nobody Is left at Medina who knows it
     better than I. Fatima was washing the blood off
     his face and 'Ali was bringing water in his shield,
     and then a mat of date-palm leaves was burnt
     and (the ash) was inserted into the wound." 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 176: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Abis: 

     I heard Ibn 'Abbas answering a man who asked
     him, "Did you attend the prayer of 'Id al Adha or
     'Id-al-Fitr with Allah's Apostle?" Ibn 'Abbas
     replied, "Yes, and had it not been for my close
     relationship with him, I could not have offered it."
     (That was because of his young age). Ibn 'Abbas
     further said, Allah's Apostle went out and offered
     the Id prayer and then delivered the sermon." Ibn
     'Abbas did not mention anything about the
     Adhan (the call for prayer) or the Iqama. He
     added, "Then the Prophet went to the women
     and instructed them and gave them religious
     advice and ordered them to give alms and I saw
     them reaching out (their hands to) their ears and
     necks (to take off the earrings and necklaces,
     etc.) and throwing (it) towards Bilal. Then the
     Prophet returned with Bilal to his house . " 


Volume 7, Book 62, Number 177: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Abu Bakr admonished me and poked me with
     his hands in the flank, and nothing stopped me
     from moving at that time except the position of
     Allah's Apostle whose head was on my thigh. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 63: 

                 Divorce 



Volume 7, Book 63, Number 178: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     that he had divorced his wife while she was
     menstruating during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle
     . 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked Allah's Apostle
     about that. Allah's Apostle said, "Order him
     (your son) to take her back and keep her till she
     is clean and then to wait till she gets her next
     period and becomes clean again, whereupon, if
     he wishes to keep her, he can do so, and if he
     wishes to divorce her he can divorce her before
     having sexual intercourse with her; and that is the
     prescribed period which Allah has fixed for the
     women meant to be divorced." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 179: 

     Narrated Anas bin Sirin: 

     Ibn 'Umar said: "I divorced my wife while she
     was menstruating. 'Umar mentioned that to the
     Prophet . The Prophet said, (to my father), "Let
     your son take her back." I asked (Ibn 'Umar), "Is
     such a divorce counted (i.e. as one legal
     divorce)?" Ibn 'Umar said, "Of course." Narrated
     Yunus bin Jubair: Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet
     said to 'Umar, 'Order him (Ibn 'Umar) to take
     her back.' " I asked, "Is such a divorce counted
     (as one legal divorce)?" Ibn 'Umar said, "What
     do you think if someone becomes helpless and
     foolish?" 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 180: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     (Divorcing my wife during her menses) was
     counted as one legal divorce. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 181: 

     Narrated Al-Awza: 

     I asked Az-Zuhri, "Which of the wives of the
     Prophet sought refuge with Allah from him?" He
     said "I was told by 'Ursa that 'Aisha said, 'When
     the daughter of Al-Jaun was brought to Allah's
     Apostle (as his bride) and he went near her, she
     said, "I seek refuge with Allah from you." He
     said, "You have sought refuge with The Great;
     return to your family." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 182: 

     Narrated Abu Usaid: 

     We went out with the Prophet to a garden called
     Ash-Shaut till we reached two walls between
     which we sat down. The Prophet said, "Sit here,"
     and went in (the garden). The Jauniyya (a lady
     from Bani Jaun) had been brought and lodged in
     a house in a date-palm garden in the home of
     Umaima bint An-Nu'man bin Sharahil, and her
     wet nurse was with her. When the Prophet
     entered upon her, he said to her, "Give me
     yourself (in marriage) as a gift." She said, "Can a
     princess give herself in marriage to an ordinary
     man?" The Prophet raised his hand to pat her so
     that she might become tranquil. She said, "I seek
     refuge with Allah from you." He said, "You have
     sought refuge with One Who gives refuge. Then
     the Prophet came out to us and said, "O Abu
     Usaid! Give her two white linen dresses to wear
     and let her go back to her family." Narrated Sahl
     and Abu Usaid: The Prophet married Umaima
     bint Sharahil, and when she was brought to him,
     he stretched his hand towards her. It seemed that
     she disliked that, whereupon the Prophet
     ordered Abu Usaid to prepare her and to
     provide her with two white linen dresses. (See
     Hadith No. 541). 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 183: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     similarly as above (182). 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 184: 

     Narrated Abi Ghallab Yunus bin Jubair: 

     I asked Ibn 'Umar,"(What is said regarding) a
     man divorces his wife during her period?" He
     said, "Do you know Ibn 'Umar? Ibn 'Umar
     divorced his wife while she was menstruating.
     'Umar then went to the Prophet and mentioned
     that to him. The Prophet ordered him to take her
     back and when she became clean, he could
     divorce her if he wanted." I asked (Ibn 'Umar),
     "Was that divorce counted as one legal divorce?"
     He said, "If one becomes helpless and foolish
     (will he be excused? Of course not). " 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 185: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi: 

     Uwaimir Al-'Ajlani came to 'Asim bin Adi
     Al-Ansari and asked, "O 'Asim! Tell me, if a man
     sees his wife with another man, should he kill
     him, whereupon you would kill him in Qisas, or
     what should he do? O 'Asim! Please ask Allah's
     Apostle about that." 'Asim asked Allah's Apostle
     about that. Allah's Apostle disliked that question
     and considered it disgraceful. What 'Asim heard
     from Allah's Apostle was hard on him. When he
     returned to his family, 'Uwaimir came to him and
     said "O 'Asim! What did Allah's Apostle say to
     you?" 'Asim said, "You never bring me any good.
     Allah's Apostle disliked to hear the problem
     which I asked him about." 'Uwaimir said, "By
     Allah, I will not leave the matter till I ask him
     about it." So 'Uwaimir proceeded till he came to
     Allah's Apostle who was in the midst of the
     people and said, "O Allah's Apostle! If a man
     finds with his wife another man, should he kill
     him, whereupon you would kill him (in Qisas): or
     otherwise, what should he do?" Allah's Apostle
     said, "Allah has revealed something concerning
     the question of you and your wife. Go and bring
     her here." So they both carried out the judgment
     of Lian, while I was present among the people
     (as a witness). When both of them had finished,
     'Uwaimir said, "O Allah's Apostle! If I should
     now keep my wife with me, then I have told a
     lie". Then he pronounced his decision to divorce
     her thrice before Allah's Apostle ordered him to
     do so. (Ibn Shihab said, "That was the tradition
     for all those who are involved in a case of Lian." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 186: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The wife of Rifa'a Al-Qurazi came to Allah's
     Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Rifa'a
     divorced me irrevocably. After him I married
     'Abdur-Rahman bin Az-Zubair Al-Qurazi who
     proved to be impotent." Allah's Apostle said to
     her, "Perhaps you want to return to Rifa'a? Nay
     (you cannot return to Rifa'a) until you and
     'Abdur-Rahman consummate your marriage." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 187: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     A man divorced his wife thrice (by expressing his
     decision to divorce her thrice), then she married
     another man who also divorced her. The Prophet
     was asked if she could legally marry the first
     husband (or not). The Prophet replied, "No, she
     cannot marry the first husband unless the second
     husband consummates his marriage with her, just
     as the first husband had done." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 188: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle gave us the option (to remain
     with him or to be divorced) and we selected
     Allah and His Apostle . So, giving us that option
     was not regarded as divorce. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 189: 

     Narrated Musruq: 

     I asked 'Aisha about the option: She said, "The
     Prophet gave us the option. Do you think that
     option was considered as a divorce?" I said, "It
     matters little to me if I give my wife the option
     once or a hundred times after she has chosen
     me." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 190: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     A man divorced his wife and she married another
     man who proved to be impotent and divorced
     her. She could not get her satisfaction from him,
     and after a while he divorced her. Then she came
     to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! My
     first husband divorced me and then I married
     another man who entered upon me to
     consummate his marriage but he proved to be
     impotent and did not approach me except once
     during which he benefited nothing from me. Can I
     remarry my first husband in this case?" Allah's
     Apostle said, "It is unlawful to marry your first
     husband till the other husband consummates his
     marriage with you." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 191: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     that he heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, "If a man makes
     his wife unlawful for him, it does not mean that
     she is divorced." He added, "Indeed in the
     Apostle of Allah , you have a good example to
     follow." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 192: 

     Narrated 'Ubaid bin 'Umar: 

     I heard 'Aisha saying, "The Prophet used to stay
     for a long while with Zanab bint Jahsh and drink
     honey at her house. So Hafsa and I decided that
     if the Prophet came to anyone of us, she should
     say him, "I detect the smell of Maghafir (a nasty
     smelling gum) in you. Have you eaten Maghafir?'
     " So the Prophet visited one of them and she said
     to him similarly. The Prophet said, "Never mind,
     I have taken some honey at the house of Zainab
     bint Jahsh, but I shall never drink of it anymore."
     So there was revealed: 'O Prophet ! Why do you
     ban (for you) that which Allah has made lawful
     for you . . . If you two (wives of Prophet) turn in
     repentance to Allah,' (66.1-4) addressing Aisha
     and Hafsa. 'When the Prophet disclosed a matter
     in confidence to some of his wives.' (66.3)
     namely his saying: But I have taken some honey."


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 193: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle was fond of honey and sweet
     edible things and (it was his habit) that after
     finishing the 'Asr prayer he would visit his wives
     and stay with one of them at that time. Once he
     went to Hafsa, the daughter of 'Umar and stayed
     with her more than usual. I got jealous and asked
     the reason for that. I was told that a lady of her
     folk had given her a skin filled with honey as a
     present, and that she made a syrup from it and
     gave it to the Prophet to drink (and that was the
     reason for the delay). I said, "By Allah we will
     play a trick on him (to prevent him from doing
     so)." So I said to Sada bint Zam'a "The Prophet
     will approach you, and when he comes near you,
     say: 'Have you taken Maghafir (a bad-smelling
     gum)?' He will say, 'No.' Then say to him: 'Then
     what is this bad smell which i smell from you?'
     He will say to you, 'Hafsa made me drink honey
     syrup.' Then say: Perhaps the bees of that honey
     had sucked the juice of the tree of Al-'Urfut.' I
     shall also say the same. O you, Safiyya, say the
     same." Later Sada said, "By Allah, as soon as he
     (the Prophet ) stood at the door, I was about to
     say to him what you had ordered me to say
     because I was afraid of you." So when the
     Prophet came near Sada, she said to him, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Have you taken Maghafir?" He
     said, "No." She said. "Then what is this bad smell
     which I detect on you?" He said, "Hafsa made
     me drink honey syrup." She said, "Perhaps its
     bees had sucked the juice of Al-'Urfut tree."
     When he came to me, I also said the same, and
     when he went to Safiyya, she also said the same.
     And when the Prophet again went to Hafsa, she
     said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Shall I give you more of
     that drink?" He said, "I am not in need of it."
     Sada said, "By Allah, we deprived him (of it)." I
     said to her, "Keep quiet." ' 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 194: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah has forgiven my
     followers the evil thoughts that occur to their
     minds, as long as such thoughts are not put into
     action or uttered." And Qatada said, "If someone
     divorces his wife just in his mind, such an
     unuttered divorce has no effect.: 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 195: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     A man from the tribe of Bani Aslam came to the
     Prophet while he was in the mosque and said, "I
     have committed illegal sexual intercourse." The
     Prophet turned his face to the other side. The
     man turned towards the side towards which the
     Prophet had turned his face, and gave four
     witnesses against himself. On that the Prophet
     called him and said, "Are you insane?" (He
     added), "Are you married?" The man said, 'Yes."
     On that the Prophet ordered him to be stoned to
     the death in the Musalla (a praying place). When
     the stones hit him with their sharp edges and he
     fled, but he was caught at Al-Harra and then
     killed 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 196: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man from Bani Aslam came to Allah's Apostle
     while he was in the mosque and called (the
     Prophet ) saying, "O Allah's Apostle! I have
     committed illegal sexual intercourse." On that the
     Prophet turned his face from him to the other
     side, whereupon the man moved to the side
     towards which the Prophet had turned his face,
     and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have committed
     illegal sexual intercourse." The Prophet turned his
     face (from him) to the other side whereupon the
     man moved to the side towards which the
     Prophet had turned his face, and repeated his
     statement. The Prophet turned his face (from
     him) to the other side again. The man moved
     again (and repeated his statement) for the fourth
     time. So when the man had given witness four
     times against himself, the Prophet called him and
     said, "Are you insane?" He replied, "No." The
     Prophet then said (to his companions), "Go and
     stone him to death." The man was a married one.
     Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari said: I was one of
     those who stoned him. We stoned him at the
     Musalla ('Id praying place) in Medina. When the
     stones hit him with their sharp edges, he fled, but
     we caught him at Al-Harra and stoned him till he
     died. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 197: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The wife of Thabit bin Qais came to the Prophet
     and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I do not blame
     Thabit for defects in his character or his religion,
     but I, being a Muslim, dislike to behave in
     un-Islamic manner (if I remain with him)." On that
     Allah's Apostle said (to her), "Will you give back
     the garden which your husband has given you (as
     Mahr)?" She said, "Yes." Then the Prophet said
     to Thabit, "O Thabit! Accept your garden, and
     divorce her once." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 198: 

     Narrated 'Ikrima: 

     The sister of 'Abdullah bin Ubai narrated (the
     above narration, 197) with the addition that the
     Prophet said to Thabit's wife, "Will you return his
     garden?" She said, "Yes," and returned it, and
     (then) the Prophet ordered Thabit to divorce her.
     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: The wife of Thabit bin
     Qais came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I do not blame Thabit for any
     defects in his character or his religion, but I
     cannot endure to live with him." On that Allah's
     Apostle said, "Will you return his garden to him?"
     She said, "Yes." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 199: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The wife of Thabit bin Qais bin Shammas came
     to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I do
     not blame Thabit for any defects in his character
     or his religion, but I am afraid that I (being a
     Muslim) may become unthankful for Allah's
     Blessings." On that, Allah's Apostle said (to her),
     'Will you return his garden to him?" She said,
     "Yes." So she returned his garden to him and the
     Prophet told him to divorce her. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 200: 

     Narrated 'Ikrima: 

     that Jamila... Then he related the whole ,Hadith,
     (i.e. 199). 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 201: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama Az-Zuhri: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Banu Al-Mughira
     have asked my leave to let 'Ali marry their
     daughter, but I give no leave to this effect." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 202: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Three traditions were
     established concerning situations in which Barra
     was involved: When she was manumitted, she
     was given the option to keep her husband or
     leave him; Allah's Apostle said, "The wala is for
     the one who manumits, Once Allah's Apostle
     entered the house while some meat was being
     cooked in a pot, but only bread and some soup
     of the house were placed before, him. He said,
     "Don't I see the pot containing meat?" They said,
     "Yes, but that meat was given to Barira in charity
     (by someone), and you do not eat what it given
     in charity."The Prophet said "That meat is alms
     for her, but for us it is a present." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 203: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     I saw him as a slave, (namely, Barira's husband). 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 204: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     That was Mughith, the slave of Bani so-and-so,
     i.e., Barira's husband as if I am now looking at
     him following her (Barira) along the streets of
     Medina. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 205: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Barira's husband was a black slave called
     Mughith, the slave of Bani so-and-so-- as if I am
     seeing him now, walking behind her along the
     streets of Medina. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 206: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Barira's husband was a slave called Mughith, as
     if I am seeing him now, going behind Barira and
     weeping with his tears flowing down his beard.
     The Prophet said to 'Abbas, "O 'Abbas ! are you
     not astonished at the love of Mughith for Barira
     and the hatred of Barira for Mughith?" The
     Prophet then said to Barira, "Why don't you
     return to him?" She said, "O Allah's Apostle! Do
     you order me to do so?" He said, "No, I only
     intercede for him." She said, "I am not in need of
     him." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 207: 

     Narrated Al-Aswad: 

     Aisha intended to buy Barira, but her masters
     stipulated that her wala wound be for them.
     Aisha mentioned that to the Prophet who said (to
     'Aisha), "Buy and manumit her, for the wala is for
     the one who manumits." Once some me; was
     brought to the Prophet and was said, "This meat
     was given in charity to Barira. " The Prophet
     said, "It an object of charity for Barira and
     present for us." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 208: 

     Narrated Adam: 

     Shu'ba relate the same Hadith and added: Barira
     was given the option regarding her husband 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 209: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Whenever Ibn 'Umar was asked about marrying
     a Christian lady or a Jewess, he would say:
     "Allah has made it unlawful for the believers to
     marry ladies who ascribe partners in worship to
     Allah, and I do not know of a greater thing, as
     regards to ascribing partners in worship, etc. to
     Allah, than that a lady should say that Jesus is her
     Lord although he is just one of Allah's slaves." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 210: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The pagans were of two kinds as regards their
     relationship to the Prophet and the Believers.
     Some of them were those with whom the
     Prophet was at war and used to fight against, and
     they used to fight him; the others were those with
     whom the Prophet made a treaty, and neither did
     the Prophet fight them, nor did they fight him. If a
     lady from the first group of pagans emigrated
     towards the Muslims, her hand would not be
     asked in marriage unless she got the menses and
     then became clean. When she became clean, it
     would be lawful for her to get married, and if her
     husband emigrated too before she got married,
     then she would be returned to him. If any slave
     or female slave emigrated from them to the
     Muslims, then they would be considered free
     persons (not slaves) and they would have the
     same rights as given to other emigrants. The
     narrator then mentioned about the pagans
     involved with the Muslims in a treaty, the same as
     occurs in Mujahid's narration. If a male slave or a
     female slave emigrated from such pagans as had
     made a treaty with the Muslims, they would not
     be returned, but their prices would be paid (to
     the pagans). Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: Qariba, the
     daughter of Abi Umaiyya, was the wife of 'Umar
     bin Al-Khattab. 'Umar divorced her and then
     Mu'awiyya bin Abi Sufyan married her. Similarly,
     Um Al-Hakam, the daughter of Abi Sufyan was
     the wife of 'Iyad bin Ghanm Al-Fihri. He
     divorced her and then 'Abdullah bin 'Uthman
     Al-Thaqafi married her. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 211: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) When believing women
     came to the Prophet as emigrants, he used to test
     them in accordance with the order of Allah. 'O
     you who believe! When believing women come
     to you as emigrants, examine them . . .' (60.10)
     So if anyone of those believing women accepted
     the above mentioned conditions, she accepted
     the conditions of faith. When they agreed on
     those conditions and confessed that with their
     tongues, Allah's Apostle would say to them, "Go,
     I have accepted your oath of allegiance (for
     Islam). By Allah, and hand of Allah's Apostle
     never touched the hand of any woman, but he
     only used to take their pledge of allegiance orally.
     By Allah, Allah's Apostle did not take the pledge
     of allegiance of the women except in accordance
     with what Allah had ordered him. When he
     accepted their pledge of allegiance he would say
     to them, "I have accepted your oath of
     allegiance." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 212: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle took an oath that he would
     abstain from his wives, and at that time his leg
     had been sprained (dislocated). So he stayed in
     the Mashruba (an attic room) of his for 29 days.
     Then he came down, and they (the people) said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! You took an oath to abstain
     from your wives for one month." He said, "The
     month is of twenty nine days." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 213: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar used to say about the Ila (which Allah
     defined (in the Holy Book), "If the period of Ila
     expires, then the husband has either to retain his
     wife in a handsome manner or to divorce her as
     Allah has ordered." Ibn 'Umar added, "When the
     period of four months has expired, the husband
     should be put in prison so that he should divorce
     his wife, but the divorce does not occur unless
     the husband himself declares it. This has been
     mentioned by 'Uthman, 'Ali, Abu Ad-Darda,
     'Aisha and twelve other companions of the
     Prophet ." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 214: 

     Narrated Yazid: 

     (the Maula of Munba'ith) The Prophet was
     asked regarding the case of a lost sheep. He
     said, "You should take it, because it is for you, or
     for your brother, or for the wolf." Then he was
     asked about a lost camel. He got angry and his
     face became red and he said (to the questioner),
     "You have nothing to do with it; it has its feet and
     its water container with it; it can go on drinking
     water and eating trees till its owner meets it."
     And then the Prophet was asked about a Luqata
     (money found by somebody). He said,
     "Remember and recognize its tying material and
     its container, and make public announcement
     about it for one year. If somebody comes and
     identifies it (then give it to him), otherwise add it
     to your property." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 215: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle performed the Tawaf (around the
     Ka'ba while riding his camel, and every time he
     reached the corner (of the Black Stone) he
     pointed at it with his hand and said, "Allahu
     Akbar." (Zainab said: The Prophet said, "An
     opening has been made in the wall of Gog and
     Magog like this and this," forming the number 90
     (with his thumb and index finger). 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 216: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Abul Qasim (the Prophet ) said, "There is an
     hour (or a moment) of particular significance on
     Friday. If it happens that a Muslim is offering a
     prayer and invoking Allah for some good at that
     very moment, Allah will grant him his request."
     (The sub-narrator placed the top of his finger on
     the palm of the other hand between the middle
     finger and the little one.) 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 216h: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     During the lifetime of Allah's Apostle a Jew
     attacked a girl and took some silver ornaments
     she was wearing and crushed her head. Her
     relative brought her to the Prophet while she was
     in her last breaths, and she was unable to speak.
     Allah's Apostle asked her, "Who has hit you?
     So-and so?", mentioning somebody other than
     her murderer. She moved her head, indicating
     denial. The Prophet mentioned another person
     other than the murderer, and she again moved
     her head indicating denial. Then he asked, "Was
     it so-and-so?", mentioning the name of her killer.
     She nodded, agreeing. Then Allah's Apostle;
     ordered that the head of that Jew be crushed
     between two stones. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 217: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Afflictions will
     emerge from here," pointing towards the East. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 218: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi A'ufa: 

     We were with Allah's Apostle on a journey, and
     when the sun set, he said to a man, "Get down
     and prepare a drink of Sawiq for me." The man
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! Will you wait till it is
     evening?" Allah's Apostle again said, "Get down
     and prepare a drink of Sawiq." The man said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Will you wait till it is evening, for
     it is still daytime. " The Prophet again said, "Get
     down and prepare a drink of Sawiq." So the
     third time the man got down and prepared a
     drink of sawiq for him. Allah's Apostle drank
     thereof and pointed with his hand towards the
     East, saying, "When you see the night falling from
     this side, then a fasting person should break his
     fast." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 219a: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet said, "The call (or the Adhan) of
     Bila should not stop you from taking the
     Suhur-meals for Bilal calls (or pronounces the
     Adhan) so that the one who is offering the night
     prayer should take a rest, and he does not
     indicate the daybreak or dawn." The narrator,
     Yazid, described (how dawn breaks) by
     stretching out his hands and then separating them
     wide apart. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 219i: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, The example of a miser and
     a generous person is like that of two persons
     wearing iron cloaks from the breast upto the
     neck When the generous person spends, the iron
     cloak enlarges and spread over his skin so much
     so that it covers his fingertips and obliterates his
     tracks. As for the miser, as soon as he thinks of
     spending every ring of the iron cloak sticks to its
     place (against his body) and he tries to expand it,
     but it does not expand. The Prophet pointed with
     his hand towards his throat. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 220: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Shall I tell you of the best
     families among the Ansar?" They (the people)
     said, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet
     said, "The best are Banu- An-Najjar, and after
     them are Banu 'Abdil Ash-hal, and after them are
     Banu Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj, and after them
     are Banu Sa'ida." The Prophet then moved his
     hand by closing his fingers and then opening them
     like one throwing something, and then said,
     "Anyhow, there is good in all the families of the
     Ansar. " 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 221: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi: 

     (a companion of Allah's Apostle) Allah's
     Apostle, holding out his middle and index fingers,
     said, "My advent and the Hour's are like this (or
     like these)," namely, the period between his era
     and the Hour is like the distance between those
     two fingers, i.e., very short. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 222: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet (holding out his ten fingers thrice),
     said, "The month is thus and thus and thus,"
     namely thirty days. Then (holding out his ten
     fingers twice and then nine fingers), he said, "It
     may be thus and thus and thus," namely twenty
     nine days. He meant once thirty days and once
     twenty nine days. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 223: 

     Narrated Abu Masud: 

     The Prophet pointed with his hand towards
     Yemen and said twice, "Faith is there," and then
     pointed towards the East, and said, "Verily,
     sternness and mercilessness are the qualities of
     those who are busy with their camels and pay no
     attention to their religion, where the two sides of
     the head of Satan will appear," namely, the tribes
     of Rabl'a and Muqar. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 224: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "I and the one who looks
     after an orphan will be like this in Paradise,"
     showing his middle and index fingers and
     separating them. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 225: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! A black child has been born for me."
     The Prophet asked him, "Have you got camels?"
     The man said, "Yes." The Prophet asked him,
     "What color are they?" The man replied, "Red."
     The Prophet said, "Is there a grey one among
     them?' The man replied, "Yes." The Prophet
     said, "Whence comes that?" He said, "May be it
     is because of heredity." The Prophet said, "May
     be your latest son has this color because of
     heredity." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 226: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     An Ansari man accused his wife (of committing
     illegal sexual intercourse). The Prophet made
     both of them takes the oath of Lian, and
     separated them from each other (by divorce). 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 227: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Hilal bin Umaiyya accused his wife of illegal
     sexual intercourse and came to the Prophet to
     bear witness (against her), (taking the oath of
     Lian). The Prophet was saying, "Allah knows
     that either of you is a liar. Will anyone of you
     repent (to Allah)?" Then the lady got up and gave
     her witness. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 228: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi: 

     'Uwaimir Al-Ajlani came to 'Asim bin Ad
     Al-Ansari and said to him, "O 'Asim! Suppose a
     man saw another man with his wife, would he kill
     him whereupon you would kill him; or what
     should he do? Please, O 'Asim, ask about this on
     my behalf." 'Asim asked Allah's Apostle about it.
     Allah's Apostle, disliked that question and
     considered it disgraceful. What 'Asim heard from
     Allah's Apostle was hard on him. When 'Asim
     returned to his family, 'Uwaimir came to him and
     said, "O 'Asim! What did Allah's Apostle. say to
     you?" 'Asim said to 'Uwaimir, "You never bring
     me any good. Allah's Apostle disliked the
     problem which I asked him about." 'Uwaimir
     said, "By Allah, I will not give up this matter until
     I ask the Prophet about it." So 'Uwaimir
     proceeded till he came to Allah's Apostle in the
     midst of people, and said, "O Allah's Apostle! If
     a man sees another man with his wife, would he
     kill him, whereupon you would kill him, or what
     should he do?" Allah's Apostle said, "Allah has
     revealed some decree as regards you and your
     wives case. Go and bring her." So they carried
     out the process of Lian while I was present
     among the people with Allah's Apostle. When
     they had finished their Lian, 'Uwaimir said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! If I should now keep her with
     me as a wife, then I have told a lie." So he
     divorced her thrice before Allah's Apostle
     ordered him. (Ibn Shihab said: So divorce was
     the tradition for all those who were involved in a
     case of Lian.) 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 229: 

     Narrated Ibn Juraij: 

     Ibn Shihab informed me of Lian and the tradition
     related to it, referring to the narration of Sahl bin
     Sad, the brother of Bani Sa'idi He said, "An
     Ansari man came to Allah's Apostle and said, 'O
     Allah's Apostle! If a man saw another man with
     his wife, should he kill him, or what should he
     do?' So Allah revealed concerning his affair what
     is mentioned in the Holy Quran about the affair of
     those involved in a case of Lian. The Prophet
     said, 'Allah has given His verdict regarding you
     and your wife.' So they carried out Lian in the
     mosque while I was present there. When they
     had finished, the man said, "O Allah's Apostle! If
     I should now keep her with me as a wife then I
     have told a lie about her. Then he divorced her
     thrice before Allah's Apostle ordered him, when
     they had finished the Lian process. So he
     divorced her in front of the Prophet ." Ibn Shihab
     added, "After their case, it became a tradition
     that a couple involved in a case of Lian should be
     separated by divorce. That lady was pregnant
     then, and later on her son was called by his
     mother's name. The tradition concerning their
     inheritance was that she would be his heir and he
     would inherit of her property the share Allah had
     prescribed for him." Ibn Shihab said that Sahl bin
     Sad As'Saidi said that the Prophet said (in the
     above narration), "If that lady delivers a small red
     child like a lizard, then the lady has spoken the
     truth and the man was a liar, but if she delivers a
     child with black eyes and huge lips, then her
     husband has spoken the truth." Then she
     delivered it in the shape one would dislike (as it
     proved her guilty). 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 230: 

     Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad: 

     Ibn 'Abbas; said, "Once Lian was mentioned
     before the Prophet whereupon 'Asim bin Adi
     said something and went away. Then a man from
     his tribe came to him, complaining that he had
     found a man width his wife. 'Asim said, 'I have
     not been put to task except for my statement
     (about Lian).' 'Asim took the man to the Prophet
     and the man told him of the state in which he had
     found his wife. The man was pale, thin, and of
     lank hair, while the other man whom he claimed
     he had seen with his wife, was brown, fat and
     had much flesh on his calves. The Prophet
     invoked, saying, 'O Allah! Reveal the truth.' So
     that lady delivered a child resembling the man
     whom her husband had mentioned he had found
     her with. The Prophet then made them carry out
     Lian." Then a man from that gathering asked Ibn
     'Abbas, "Was she the same lady regarding which
     the Prophet had said, 'If I were to stone to death
     someone without witness, I would have stoned
     this lady'?" Ibn 'Abbas said, "No, that was
     another lady who, though being a Muslim, used
     to arouse suspicion by her outright misbehavior. "


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 231: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     I asked Ibn 'Umar, "(What is the verdict if) a
     man accuses his wife of illegal sexual
     intercourse?" Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet
     separated (by divorce) the couple of Bani
     Al-Ajlan, and said, (to them), 'Allah knows that
     one of you two is a liar; so will one of you
     repent?' But both of them refused. He again said,
     'Allah knows that one of you two is a liar; so will
     one of you repent?' But both of them refused. So
     he separated them by divorce." (Aiyub, a
     sub-narrator said: 'Amr bin Dinar said to me,
     "There is something else in this Hadith which you
     have not mentioned. It goes thus: The man said,
     'What about my money (i.e. the Mahr that I have
     given to my wife)?' It was said, 'You have no
     right to restore any money, for if you have
     spoken the truth (as regards the accusation), you
     have also consummated your marriage with her;
     and if you have told a lie, you are less rightful to
     have your money back.' ") 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 232: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     I asked Ibn 'Umar about those who were
     involved in a case of Lien. He said, "The Prophet
     said to those who were involved in a case of
     Lien, 'Your accounts are with Allah. One of you
     two is a liar, and you (the husband) have no right
     over her (she is divorced)." The man said, 'What
     about my property (Mahr) ?' The Prophet said,
     'You have no right to get back your property. If
     you have told the truth about her then your
     property was for the consummation of your
     marriage with her; and if you told a lie about her,
     then you are less rightful to get your property
     back.' " Sufyan, a sub-narrator said: I learned the
     Hadith from 'Amr. Narrated Aiyub: I heard Sa'id
     bin Jubair saying, "I asked Ibn 'Umar, 'If a man
     (accuses his wife for an illegal sexual intercourse
     and) carries out the process of Lian (what will
     happen)?' Ibn 'Umar set two of his fingers apart.
     (Sufyan set his index finger and middle finger
     apart.) Ibn 'Umar said, 'The Prophet separated
     the couple of Bani Al-Ajlan by divorce and said
     thrice, "Allah knows that one of you two is a liar;
     so will one of you repent (to Allah)?' " 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 233: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle separated (divorced) the wife
     from her husband who accused her for an illegal
     sexual intercourse, and made them take the oath
     of Lian . 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 234: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet made an Ansari man and his wife
     carry out Lian, and then separated them by
     divorce. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 235: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: The Prophet made a man
     and his wife carry out Lian, and the husband
     repudiated her child. So the Prophet got them
     separated (by divorce) and decided that the child
     belonged to the mother only. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 236: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Those involved in a case of Lian were mentioned
     before Allah's Apostle Asim bin Adi said
     something about that and then left. Later on a
     man from his tribe came to him and told him that
     he had found another man with his wife. On that
     'Asim said, "I have not been put to task except
     for what I have said (about Lian)." 'Asim took
     the man to Allah's Apostle and he told him of the
     state in which he found his wife. The man was
     pale, thin and lank-haired, while the other man
     whom he had found with his wife was brown, fat
     with thick calves and curly hair. Allah's Apostle
     said, "O Allah! Reveal the truth." Then the lady
     delivered a child resembling the man whom her
     husband had mentioned he had found with her.
     So Allah's Apostle ordered them to carry out
     Lien. A man from that gathering said to Ibn
     'Abbas, "Was she the same lady regarding whom
     Allah's Apostle said, 'If I were to stone to death
     someone without witnesses, I would have stoned
     this lady'?" Ibn 'Abbas said, "No, that was
     another lady who, though being a Muslim, used
     to arouse suspicion because of her outright
     misbehavior." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 237: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said . . . (as in 240). 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 238: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Rifa'a Al-Qurazi married a lady and then
     divorced her whereupon she married another
     man. She came to the Prophet and said that her
     new husband did not approach her, and that he
     was completely impotent. The Prophet said (to
     her), "No (you cannot remarry your first
     husband) till you taste the second husband and
     he tastes you (i.e. till he consummates his
     marriage with you)." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 239: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) A lady from Bani
     Aslam, called Subai'a, become a widow while
     she was pregnant. Abu As-Sanabil bin Ba'kak
     demanded her hand in marriage, but she refused
     to marry him and said, "By Allah, I cannot marry
     him unless I have completed one of the two
     prescribed periods." About ten days later (after
     having delivered her child), she went to the
     Prophet and he said (to her), "You can marry
     now." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 240: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abdullah: 

     that his father had written to Ibn Al-Arqam a
     letter asking him to ask Subai'a Al-Aslamiya how
     the Prophet had given her the verdict. She said,
     "The Prophet, gave me his verdict that after I
     gave birth, I could marry." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 241: 

     Narrated Al-Miswer bin Makhrama: 

     Subai'a Al-Aslamiya gave birth to a child a few
     days after the death of her husband. She came to
     the Prophet and asked permission to remarry,
     and the Prophet gave her permission, and she got
     married. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 242: 

     Narrated Qasim bin Muhammad and Sulaiman
     bin Yasar: 

     that Yahya bin Said bin Al-'As divorced the
     daughter of 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Hakarn.
     Abdur-Rahman took her to his house. On that
     'Aisha sent a message to Marwan bin Al-Hakam
     who was the ruler of Medina, saying, "Fear
     Allah, and urge your brother) to return her to her
     house." Marwan (in Sulaiman's version) said,
     "Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Hakam did not obey me
     (or had a convincing argument)." (In Al-Qasim's
     versions Marwan said, "Have you not heard of
     the case of Fatima bint Qais?" Aisha said, "The
     case of Fatima bint Qais is not in your favor.'
     Marwan bin Al-Hakam said to 'Aisha, "The
     reason that made Fatima bint Qais go to her
     father's house is just applicable to the daughter of
     'Abdur-Rahman." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 243: 

     Narrated Al-Qasim: 

     Aisha said, "What is wrong with Fatima? Why
     doesn't she fear Allah?" by saying that a divorced
     lady is not entitled to be provided with residence
     and sustenance (by her husband) 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 244: 

     Narrated Qasim: 

     Ursa said to Aisha, "Do you know so-and-so,
     the daughter of Al-Hakam? Her husband
     divorced her irrevocably and she left (her
     husband's house)." 'Aisha said, "What a bad
     thing she has done!" 'Ursa said (to 'Aisha),
     "Haven't you heard the statement of Fatima?"
     'Aisha replied, "It is not in her favor to mention."
     'Ursa added, 'Aisha reproached (Fatima)
     severely and said, "Fatima was in a lonely place,
     and she was proned to danger, so the Prophet 

     allowed her (to go out of her husband's house)." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 245: 

     Narrated 'Ursa: 

     Aisha disapproved of what Fatima used to say.' 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 246: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When Allah's Apostle decided to leave Mecca
     after the Hajj, he saw Safiyya, sad and standing
     at the entrance of her tent. He said to her, "Aqr
     (or) Halq! You will detain us. Did you perform
     Tawaf-al-Ifada on the day of Nahr? She said,
     "Yes." He said, "Then you can depart." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 247: 

     Narrated Al-Hasan: 

     Ma'qil gave his sister in marriage and later her
     husband divorced her once. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 248: 

     Narrated Al-Hasan: 

     The sister of Ma'qil bin Yasar was married to a
     man and then that man divorced her and
     remained away from her till her period of the
     'Iddah expired. Then he demanded for her hand
     in marriage, but Ma'qil got angry out of pride and
     haughtiness and said, "He kept away from her
     when he could still retain her, and now he
     demands her hand again?" So Ma'qil disagreed
     to remarry her to him. Then Allah revealed:
     'When you have divorced women and they have
     fulfilled the term of their prescribed period, do
     not prevent them from marrying their (former)
     husbands.' (2.232) So the Prophet sent for
     Ma'qil and recited to him (Allah's order) and
     consequently Ma'qil gave up his pride and
     haughtiness and yielded to Allah's order. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 249: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar bin Al-Khattab divorced his wife
     during her menses. Allah's Apostle ordered him
     to take her back till she became clean, and when
     she got another period while she was with him,
     she should wait till she became clean again and
     only then, if he wanted to divorce her, he could
     do so before having sexual relations with her.
     And that is the period Allah has fixed for
     divorcing women. Whenever 'Abdullah (bin
     'Umar) was asked about that, he would say to
     the questioner, "If you divorced her thrice, she is
     no longer lawful for you unless she marries
     another man (and the other man divorces her in
     his turn).' Ibn 'Umar further said, 'Would that you
     (people) only give one or two divorces, because
     the Prophet has ordered me so." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 250: 

     Narrated Yunus Ibn Jubair: 

     Ibn 'Umar divorced his wife while she was having
     her menses. 'Umar asked the Prophet who said,
     "Order him (your son) to take her back, and then
     divorced her before her period of the 'Iddah has
     elapsed." I asked Ibn 'Umar, "Will that divorce
     (during the menses) be counted?" He replied, "If
     somebody behaves foolishly (will his foolishness
     be an excuse for his misbehavior)?" 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 251: 

     Narrated Humaid bin Nafi': 

     Zainab bint Abu Salama told me these three
     narrations: Zainab said: I went to Um Habiba, the
     wife of the Prophet when her father, Abu-
     Sufyan bin Herb had died. Um ,Habiba asked
     for a perfume which contained yellow scent
     (Khaluq) or some other scent, and she first
     perfumed one of the girls with it and then rubbed
     her cheeks with it and said, "By Allah, I am not in
     need of perfume, but I have heard Allah's
     Apostle saying, 'It is not lawful for a lady who
     believes in Allah and the Last Day to mourn for a
     dead person for more than three days unless he
     is her husband for whom she should mourn for
     four months and ten days.' " Zainab further said: I
     want to Zainab bint Jahsh when her brother died.
     She asked for perfume and used some of it and
     said, "By Allah, I am not in need of perfume, but
     I have heard Allah's Apostle saying on the pulpit,
     'It is not lawful for a lady who believes in Allah
     and the last day to mourn for more than three
     days except for her husband for whom she
     should mourn for four months and ten days.' "
     Zainab further said, "I heard my mother, Um
     Salama saying that a woman came to Allah's
     Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The
     husband of my daughter has died and she is
     suffering from an eye disease, can she apply kohl
     to her eye?" Allah's Apostle replied, "No," twice
     or thrice. (Every time she repeated her question)
     he said, "No." Then Allah's Apostle added, "It is
     just a matter of four months and ten days. In the
     Pre-Islamic Period of ignorance a widow among
     you should throw a globe of dung when one year
     has elapsed." I said to Zainab, "What does
     'throwing a globe of dung when one year had
     elapsed' mean?" Zainab said, "When a lady was
     bereaved of her husband, she would live in a
     wretched small room and put on the worst
     clothes she had and would not touch any scent till
     one year had elapsed. Then she would bring an
     animal, e.g. a donkey, a sheep or a bird and rub
     her body against it. The animal against which she
     would rub her body would scarcely survive. Only
     then she would come out of her room,
     whereupon she would be given a globe of dung
     which she would throw away and then she would
     use the scent she liked or the like." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 252: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     A woman was bereaved of her husband and her
     relatives worried about her eyes (which were
     diseased). They came to Allah's Apostle, and
     asked him to allow them to treat her eyes with
     kohl, but he said, "She should not apply kohl to
     her eyes. (In the Pre-Islamic period of
     Ignorance) a widowed woman among you would
     stay in the worst of her clothes (or the worst part
     of her house) and when a year had elapsed, if a
     dog passed by her, she would throw a globe of
     dung, Nay, (she cannot use kohl) till four months
     and ten days have elapsed." 

     Narrated Um Habiba: The Prophet said, "It is
     not lawful for a Muslim woman who believes in
     Allah and the Last Day to mourn for more than
     three days, except for her husband, for whom
     she should mourn for four months and ten days." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 253: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya: 

     We were forbidden to mourn for more than three
     days except for a husband. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 254: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya: 

     We were forbidden to mourn for more than three
     days for a dead person, except for a husband,
     for whom a wife should mourn for four months
     and ten days (while in the mourning period) we
     were not allowed to put kohl in our eyes, nor
     perfume our-selves, nor wear dyed clothes,
     except a garment of 'Asb (special clothes made
     in Yemen). But it was permissible for us that
     when one of us became clean from her menses
     and took a bath, she could use a piece of a
     certain kind of incense. And it was forbidden for
     us to follow funeral processions. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 255: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya: 

     The Prophet said, "It is not lawful for a lady who
     believes in Allah and the Last Day, to mourn for
     more than three days for a dead person, except
     for her husband, in which case she should neither
     put kohl in her eyes, nor perfume herself, nor
     wear dyed clothes, except a garment of 'Asb"
     Um 'Atiyya added: The Prophet said, "She
     should not use perfume except when she
     becomes clean from her menses whereupon she
     can use Qust, and Azfar (two kinds of incense). 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 256: 

     Narrated Mujahid: 

     (regarding the Verse): 'If any of you dies and
     leaves wives behind,' That was the period of the
     'Iddah which the widow was obliged to spend in
     the house of the late husband. Then Allah
     revealed: And those of you who die and leave
     wives should bequeath for their wives a year's
     maintenance and residence without turning them
     out, but if they leave, there is no blame on you
     for what they do of themselves, provided it is
     honorable (i.e. lawful marriage) (2.240) Mujahid
     said: Allah has ordered that a widow has the right
     to stay for seven months and twenty days with
     her husband's relatives through her husband's will
     and testament so that she will complete the
     period of one year (of 'Iddah). But the widow
     has the right to stay that extra period or go out of
     her husband's house as is indicated by the
     statement of Allah: 'But if they leave there is no
     blame on you,... ' (2.240) Ibn 'Abbas said: The
     above Verse has cancelled the order of spending
     the period of the 'Iddah at her late husband's
     house, and so she could spend her period of the
     'Iddah wherever she likes. And Allah says:
     'Without turning them out.' 'Ata said: If she
     would, she could spend her period of the 'Iddah
     at her husband's house, and live there according
     to her (husband's) will and testament, and if she
     would, she could go out (of her husband's house)
     as Allah says: 'There is no blame on you for what
     they do of themselves.' (2.240) 'Ata added: Then
     the Verses of inheritance were revealed and the
     order of residence (for the widow) was
     cancelled, and she could spend her period of the
     'Iddah wherever she would like, and she was no
     longer entitled to be accommodated by her
     husband's family. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 257: 

     Narrated Zainab bint Um Salama: 

     When Um Habiba bint Abi Sufyan was informed
     of her father's death, she asked for perfume and
     rubbed it over her arms and said, "I am not in
     need of perfume, but I have heard the Prophet
     saying, "It is not lawful for a lady who believes in
     Allah and the Last Day to mourn for more than
     three days except for her husband for whom the
     (mourning) period is four months and ten days." 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 258: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet prohibited taking the price of a dog,
     the earnings of a soothsayer and the money
     earned by prostitution. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 259: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     The Prophet cursed the lady who practices
     tattooing and the one who gets herself tattooed,
     and one who eats (takes) Riba' (usury) and the
     one who gives it. And he prohibited taking the
     price of a dog, and the money earned by
     prostitution, and cursed the makers of pictures. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 260: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet forbade taking the earnings of a
     slave girl by prostitution. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 261: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     I said to Ibn 'Umar, "If a man accuses his wife of
     illegal sexual intercourse (what is the judgment)?"
     He said, "Allah's Prophet separated the couple of
     Bani 'Ajlan (when the husband accused his wife
     for an illegal sexual intercourse). The Prophet
     said, 'Allah knows that one of you two IS a liar;
     so will one of you repent?' But they refused. He
     then again said, 'Allah knows that one of you two
     is a liar; so will one of you repent?' But they
     refused, whereupon he separated them by
     divorce." Aiyub (a sub-narrator) said: 'Amr bin
     Dinar said to me, "In the narration there is
     something which I do not see you mentioning, i.e.
     the husband said, "What about my money
     (Mahr)?' The Prophet said, "You are not entitled
     to take back money, for if you told the truth you
     have already entered upon her (and
     consummated your marriage with her) and if you
     are a liar then you are less entitled to take it
     back. 


Volume 7, Book 63, Number 262: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said to those who were involved in
     a case of Lian, "Your accounts are with Allah.
     One of you two is a liar. You (husband) have
     right on her (wife)." The husband said, "My
     money, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet 

     said, "You are not entitled to take back any
     money. If you have told the truth, the Mahr that
     you paid, was for having sexual relations with her
     lawfully; and if you are a liar, then you are less
     entitled to get it back." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 64: 

     Supporting the Family 



Volume 7, Book 64, Number 263: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari: 

     The Prophet said, "When a Muslim spends
     something on his family intending to receive
     Allah's reward it is regarded as Sadaqa for him." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 264: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, 'O son of
     Adam! Spend, and I shall spend on you." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 265: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The one who looks after a
     widow or a poor person is like a Mujahid
     (warrior) who fights for Allah's Cause, or like
     him who performs prayers all the night and fasts
     all the day." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 266: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     The Prophet visited me at Mecca while I was ill.
     I said (to him), "I have property; May I bequeath
     all my property in Allah's Cause?" He said, "No."
     I said, "Half of it?" He said, "No." I said, "One
     third of it?" He said, "One-third (is alright), yet it
     is still too much, for you'd better leave your
     inheritors wealthy than leave them poor, begging
     of others. Whatever you spend will be
     considered a Sadaqa for you, even the mouthful
     of food you put in the mouth of your wife.
     Anyhow Allah may let you recover, so that some
     people may benefit by you and others be harmed
     by you." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 267: 

     Narrated Al-'Amash: 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 268: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     "The Prophet said, 'The best alms is that which is
     given when one is rich, and a giving hand is better
     than a taking one, and you should start first to
     support your dependents.' A wife says, 'You
     should either provide me with food or divorce
     me.' A slave says, 'Give me food and enjoy my
     service." A son says, "Give me food; to whom
     do you leave me?" The people said, "O Abu
     Huraira! Did you hear that from Allah's Apostle
     ?" He said, "No, it is from my own self." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 269: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The best alms is that which
     you give when you are rich, and you should start
     first to support your dependants." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 270: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     The Prophet used to sell the dates of the garden
     of Bani An-Nadir and store for his family so
     much food as would cover their needs for a
     whole year. 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 271: 

     Narrated Malik bin Aus bin Al-Hadathan: 

     Once I set out to visit 'Umar (bin Al-Khattab).
     (While I was sitting there with him his
     gate-keeper, Yarfa, came and said, "Uthman
     AbdurRahman (bin 'Auf), Az-Zubair and Sad
     (bin Abi Waqqas) are seeking permission (to
     meet you)." 'Umar said, "Yes. So he admitted
     them and they entered, greeted, and sat down.
     After a short while Yarfa came again and said to
     'Umar 'Shall I admit 'Ali and 'Abbas?" 'Umar
     said, "Yes." He admitted them and when they
     entered, they greeted and sat down. 'Abbas said,
     "O Chief of the Believers! Judge between me
     and this ('Ali)." The group, 'Uthman and his
     companions Sad, 'O Chief of the Believers!
     Judge between them and relieve one from the
     other." 'Umar said. Wait! I beseech you by
     Allah, by Whose permission both the Heaven
     and the Earth stand fast ! Do you know that
     Allah's Apostle said. 'We (Apostles) do not
     bequeath anything to our heirs, but whatever we
     leave is to be given in charity.' And by that
     Allah's Apostles meant himself?" The group said,
     "He did say so." 'Umar then turned towards 'All
     and 'Abbas and said. "I beseech you both by
     Allah, do you know that Allah's Apostle said
     that?" They said, 'Yes " 'Umar said, "Now, let
     me talk to you about this matter. Allah favored
     His Apostle with something of this property (war
     booty) which He did not give to anybody else.
     And Allah said:-- 'And what Allah has bestowed
     on His Apostle (as Fai Booty) from them for
     which you made no expedition with either cavalry
     or camelry . . . Allah is Able to do all things.'
     (59.6) So this property was especially granted to
     Allah's Apostle. But by Allah he neither withheld
     it from you, nor did he keep it for himself and
     deprive you of it, but he gave it all to you and
     distributed it among you till only this remained out
     of it. And out of this property Allah's Apostle
     used to provide his family with their yearly needs,
     and whatever remained, he would spend where
     Allah's Property (the revenues of Zakat) used to
     be spent. Allah's Apostle kept on acting like this
     throughout his lifetime. Now I beseech you by
     Allah, do you know that?" They said, "Yes."
     Then 'Umar said to 'Ali and 'Abbas, "I beseech
     you by Allah, do you both know that?" They
     said, "Yes." 'Umar added, "When Allah had
     taken His Apostle unto Him, Abu Bakr said, 'I
     am the successor of Allah's Apostle. So he took
     charge of that property and did with it the same
     what Allah's Apostle used to do, and both of you
     knew all about it then." Then 'Umar turned
     towards 'Ali and Abbas and said, "You both
     claim that Abu- Bakr was so-and-so! But Allah
     knows that he was honest, sincere, pious and
     right (in that matter). Then Allah caused Abu
     Bakr to die, and i said, 'I am the successor of
     Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr.' So I kept this
     property in my possession for the first two years
     of my rule, and I used to do the same with it as
     Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr used to do. Later
     both of you ('Ali and 'Abbas) came to me with
     the same claim and the same problem. (O
     'Abbas!) You came to me demanding your share
     from (the inheritance of) the son of your brother,
     and he ('Ali) came to me demanding his wives
     share from (the inheritance of) her father. So I
     said to you, 'If you wish I will hand over this
     property to you, on condition that you both
     promise me before Allah that you will manage it
     in the same way as Allah's Apostle and Abu
     Bakr did, and as I have done since the beginning
     of my rule; otherwise you should not speak to me
     about it.' So you both said, 'Hand over this
     property to us on this condition.' And on this
     condition I handed it over to you. I beseech you
     by Allah, did I hand it over to them on that
     condition?" The group said, "Yes." 'Umar then
     faced 'Ali and 'Abbas and said, "I beseech you
     both by Allah, did I hand it over to you both on
     that condition?" They both said, "Yes." 'Umar
     added, "Do you want me now to give a decision
     other than that? By Him with Whose permission
     (order) both the Heaven and the Earth stand fast,
     I will never give any decision other than that till
     the Hour is established! But if you are unable to
     manage it (that property), then return it to me and
     I will be sufficient for it on your behalf . " 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 272: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Hind bint 'Utba came and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Abu Sufyan is a miser so is it sinful of
     me to feed our children from his property?"
     Allah's Apostle said, "No except if you take for
     your needs what is just and reasonable. " 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 273: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "If the wife gives of her
     husband's property (something in charity) without
     his permission, he will get half the reward." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 274: 

     Narrated Ali: 

     Fatima went to the Prophet complaining about
     the bad effect of the stone hand-mill on her hand.
     She heard that the Prophet had received a few
     slave girls. But (when she came there) she did
     not find him, so she mentioned her problem to
     'Aisha. When the Prophet came, 'Aisha informed
     him about that. 'Ali added, "So the Prophet came
     to us when we had gone to bed. We wanted to
     get up (on his arrival) but he said, 'Stay where
     you are." Then he came and sat between me and
     her and I felt the coldness of his feet on my
     abdomen. He said, "Shall I direct you to
     something better than what you have requested?
     When you go to bed say 'Subhan Allah'
     thirty-three times, 'Alhamdulillah' thirty three
     times, and Allahu Akbar' thirty four times, for
     that is better for you than a servant." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 275: 

     Narrated 'Ali bin Abi Talib: 

     Fatima came to the Prophet asking for a servant.
     He said, "May I inform you of something better
     than that? When you go to bed, recite "Subhan
     Allah' thirty three times, 'Alhamdulillah' thirty
     three times, and 'Allahu Akbar' thirty four times.
     'All added, 'I have never failed to recite it ever
     since." Somebody asked, "Even on the night of
     the battle of Siffin?" He said, "No, even on the
     night of the battle of Siffin." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 276: 

     Narrated Al-Aswad bin Yazid: 

     I asked 'Aisha "What did the Prophet use to do
     at home?" She said, "He used to work for his
     family, and when he heard the Adhan (call for the
     prayer), he would go out." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 277: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Hind bint 'Utba said, "O Allah's Apostle! Abu
     Sufyan is a miser and he does not give me what
     is sufficient for me and my children. Can I take of
     his property without his knowledge?" The
     Prophet said, "Take what is sufficient for you and
     your children, and the amount should be just and
     reasonable. 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 278: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The best women among
     the camel riders, are the women of Quraish."
     (Another narrator said) The Prophet said, "The
     righteous among the women of Quraish are those
     who are kind to their young ones and who look
     after their husband's property . " 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 279: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     The Prophet gave me a silk suit and I wore it, but
     when I noticed anger on his face, I cut it and
     distributed it among my women-folk. 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 280: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     My father died and left seven or nine girls and I
     married a matron. Allah's Apostle said to me, "O
     Jabir! Have you married?" I said, "Yes." He said,
     "A virgin or a matron?" I replied, "A matron." he
     said, "Why not a virgin, so that you might play
     with her and she with you, and you might amuse
     her and she amuse you." I said, " 'Abdullah (my
     father) died and left girls, and I dislike to marry a
     girl like them, so I married a lady (matron) so
     that she may look after them." On that he said,
     "May Allah bless you," or "That is good." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 281: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man came to the Prophet and said, "I am
     ruined!" The Prophet said, "Why?" He said, "I
     had sexual intercourse with my wife while fasting
     (in the month of Ramadan)." The Prophet said to
     him, "Manumit a slave (as expiation)." He
     replied, "I cannot afford that." The Prophet said,
     "Then fast for two successive months." He said,
     "I cannot." The Prophet said, "Then feed sixty
     poor persons." He said, "I have nothing to do
     that." In the meantime a basket full of dates was
     brought to the Prophet . He said, "Where is the
     questioner." The man said, "I am here." The
     Prophet said (to him), "Give this (basket of
     dates) in charity (as expiation)." He said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Shall I give it to poorer people
     than us? By Him Who sent you with the Truth,
     there is no family between Medina's two
     mountains poorer than us." The Prophet smiled
     till his pre-molar teeth became visible. He then
     said, "Then take it." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 282: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I get a reward
     (in the Hereafter) if I spend on the children of
     Abu Salama and do not leave them like this and
     like this (i.e., poor) but treat them like my
     children?" The Prophet said, "Yes, you will be
     rewarded for that which you will spend on them."


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 283: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     Hind (bint 'Utba) said, "O Allah's Apostle! Abu
     Sufyan is a miser. Is there any harm if I take of
     his property what will cover me and my
     children's needs?" The Prophet said, "Take
     (according to your needs) in a reasonable
     manner." 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 284: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A dead man in debt used to be brought to Allah's
     Apostle who would ask, "Has he left anything to
     re pay his debts?" If he was informed that he had
     left something to cover his debts the Prophet
     would offer the funeral prayer for him; otherwise
     he would say to the Muslims present there),
     "Offer the funeral prayer for your friend:"but
     when Allah helped the Prophet to gain victory
     (on his expeditions), he said, "I am closer to the
     Believers than themselves, so. if one of the
     Believers dies in debt, I will repay it, but if he
     leaves wealth, it will be for his heirs. 


Volume 7, Book 64, Number 285: 

     Narrated Um Habiba: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Will you marry my sister, the daughter
     of Abu Sufyan." The Prophet said, "Do you like
     that?" I said, "Yes, for I am not your only wife,
     and the person I like most to share the good with
     me, is my sister." He said, "That is not lawful for
     me." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! We have heard
     that you want to marry Durra, the daughter of
     Abu Salama." He said, "You mean the daughter
     of Um Salama?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Even if
     she were not my step-daughter, she is unlawful
     for me, for she is my foster niece. Thuwaiba
     suckled me and Abu Salama. So you should not
     present to me your daughters and sisters." 

     Narrated 'Ursa: Thuwaiba had been a slave girl
     whom Abu Lahab had emancipated. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 65: 

             Food, Meals 



Volume 7, Book 65, Number 286: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari: 

     The Prophet said, "Give food to the hungry, pay
     a visit to the sick and release (set free) the one in
     captivity (by paying his ransom)." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 287: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The family of Muhammad did not eat their fill for
     three successive days till he died. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 287i: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Once while I was in a state of fatigue (because of
     severe hunger), I met 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, so I
     asked him to recite a verse from Allah's Book to
     me. He entered his house and interpreted it to
     me. (Then I went out and) after walking for a
     short distance, I fell on my face because of
     fatigue and severe hunger. Suddenly I saw
     Allah's Apostle standing by my head. He said,
     "O Abu Huraira!" I replied, "Labbaik, O Allah's
     Apostle, and Sadaik!" Then he held me by the
     hand, and made me get up. Then he came to
     know what I was suffering from. He took me to
     his house, and ordered a big bowl of milk for me.
     I drank thereof and he said, "Drink more, O Abu
     Hirr!" So I drank again, whereupon he again
     said, "Drink more." So I drank more till my belly
     became full and looked like a bowl. Afterwards I
     met 'Umar and mentioned to him what had
     happened to me, and said to him, "Somebody,
     who had more right than you, O 'Umar, took
     over the case. By Allah, I asked you to recite a
     Verse to me while I knew it better than you." On
     that Umar said to me, "By Allah, if I admitted
     and entertained you, it would have been dearer
     to me than having nice red camels. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 288: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Abi Salama: 

     I was a boy under the care of Allah's Apostle
     and my hand used to go around the dish while I
     was eating. So Allah's Apostle said to me, 'O
     boy! Mention the Name of Allah and eat with
     your right hand, and eat of the dish what is nearer
     to you." Since then I have applied those
     instructions when eating. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 289: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al Salama: 

     Who was the son of Um Salama, the wife of the
     Prophet: 

     Once I ate a meal with Allah's Apostle and I was
     eating from all sides of the dish. So Allah's
     Apostle said to me, "Eat of the dish what is
     nearer to you." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 290: 

     Narrated Wahb bin Kaisan Abi Nu'aim: 

     A meal was brought to Allah's Apostle while his
     step-son, 'Umar bin Abi Salama was with him.
     Allah's Apostle said to him, "Mention the Name
     of Allah and eat of the dish what is nearer to
     you." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 291: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     A tailor invited Allah's Apostle to a meal which
     he had prepared. I went along with Allah's
     Apostle and saw him seeking to eat the pieces of
     gourd from the various sides of the dish. Since
     that day I have liked to eat gourd. 'Umar bin Abi
     Salama said: The Prophet, said to me, "Eat with
     your right hand." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 292: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to love to start doing things
     from the right side whenever possible, in
     performing ablution, putting on his shoes, and
     combing his hair. (Al-Ash'ath said: The Prophet
     used to do so in all his affairs.) 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 293: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Abu Talha said to Um Sulaim, "I have heard the
     voice of Allah's Apostle which was feeble, and I
     think that he is hungry. Have you got something
     (to eat)?" She took out some loaves of barley
     bread, then took her face-covering sheet and
     wrapped the bread in part of it, and pushed it
     under my garment and turned the rest of it
     around my body and sent me to Allah's Apostle .
     I went with that, and found Allah's Apostle in the
     mosque with some people. I stood up near them,
     and Allah's Apostle asked me, "Have you been
     sent by Abu Talha?" I said, "Yes." He asked,
     "With some food (for us)?" I said, "Yes." Then
     Allah's Apostle said to all those who were with
     him, "Get up!" He set out (and all the people
     accompanied him) and I proceeded ahead of
     them till I came to Abu Talha. Abu Talha then
     said, "O Um Sulaim! Allah's Apostle has arrived
     along with the people, and we do not have food
     enough to feed them all." She said, "Allah and
     His Apostle know better." So Abu Talha went
     out till he met Allah's Apostle. Then Abu Talha
     and Allah's Apostle came and entered the house.
     Allah's Apostle said, "Um Sulaim ! Bring
     whatever you have." She brought that very
     bread. The Prophet ordered that it be crushed
     into small pieces, and Um Sulaim pressed a skin
     of butter on it. Then Allah's Apostle said
     whatever Allah wished him to say (to bless the
     food) and then added, "Admit ten (men)." So
     they were admitted, ate their fill and went out.
     The Prophet then said, "Admit ten (more)." They
     were admitted, ate their full, and went out. He
     then again said, "Admit ten more!" They were
     admitted, ate their fill, and went out. He admitted
     ten more, and so all those people ate their fill,
     and they were eighty men. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 294: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr: 

     We were one hundred and thirty men sitting with
     the Prophet. The Prophet said, "Have anyone of
     you any food with him?" It happened that one
     man had one Sa of wheat flour (or so) which was
     turned into dough then. After a while a tall lanky
     pagan came, driving some sheep. The Prophet
     asked, 'Will you sell us (a sheep), or give (it to)
     us as a gift?" The pagan said, "No, but I will sell
     it " So the Prophet bought from him a sheep
     which was slaughtered, and then the Prophet
     ordered that the liver, the kidneys, lungs and
     heart, etc., of that sheep be roasted. By Allah,
     none of those one hundred and thirty men but
     had his share of those things. The Prophet gave
     to those who were present, and also kept a share
     for those who were absent He then served that
     cooked sheep in two big trays and we all ate
     together our fill; yet there remained a part of it in
     those two trays which I carried on the camel. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 295: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     The Prophet died when we had satisfied our
     hunger with the two black things, i.e. dates and
     water. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 296: 

     Narrated Suwaid bin An-Nu'man: 

     We went out with Allah's Apostle to Khaibar,
     and when we were at As-Sahba', (Yahya, a
     sub-narrator said, "As-Sahba' is a place at a
     distance of one day's journey to Khaibar)."
     Allah's Apostle asked the people to bring their
     food, but there was nothing with the people
     except Sawiq. So we all chewed and ate of it.
     Then the Prophet asked for some water and he
     rinsed his mouth, and we too, rinsed our mouths.
     Then he led us in the Maghrib prayer without
     performing ablution (again). 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 297: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     We were in the company of Anas whose baker
     was with him. Anas said, The Prophet did not eat
     thin bread, or a roasted sheep till he met Allah
     (died). 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 298: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     To the best of my knowledge, the Prophet did
     not take his meals in a big tray at all, nor did he
     ever eat well-baked thin bread, nor did he ever
     eat at a dining table. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 299: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet halted to consummate his marriage
     with Safiyya. I invited the Muslims to his wedding
     banquet. He ordered that leather dining sheets be
     spread. Then dates, dried yoghurt and butter
     were put on those sheets. Anas added: The
     Prophet consummated his marriage with Safiyya
     (during a journey) whereupon Hais (sweet dish)
     was served on a leather dining sheet. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 300: 

     Narrated Wahb bin Kaisan: 

     The People of Sham taunted 'Abdullah bin
     Az-Zubair by calling him "The son of
     Dhatin-Nataqain" (the woman who has two
     waist-belts). (His mother) (Asma, said to him, "O
     my son! They taunt you with "Nataqain". Do you
     know what the Nataqain were? That was my
     waist-belt which I divided in two parts. I tied the
     water skin of Allah's Apostle with one part, and
     with the other part I tied his food container." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 301: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     that his aunt, Um Hufaid bint Al-Harith bin Hazn,
     presented to the Prophet butter, dried yoghurt
     and mastigures. The Prophet invited the people
     to those mastigures and they were eaten on his
     dining sheet, but the Prophet did not eat of it, as
     if he disliked it. Nevertheless. if it was unlawful to
     eat that, the people would not have eaten it on
     the dining sheet of the Prophet nor would he
     have ordered that they be eaten. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 302: 

     Narrated Suwaid bin An-Nu'man: 

     that while they were with the Prophet at
     As-Sahba' which was at a distance of one day's
     journey from Khaibar the prayer became due,
     and the Prophet asked the people for food but
     there was nothing with the people except Sawiq.
     He ate of it and we ate along with him, and then
     he asked for water and rinsed his mouth (with it),
     and then offered the (Maghrib) prayer and we
     too offered the prayer but the Prophet did not
     perform ablution (again after eating the Sawiq.). 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 303: 

     Narrated Khalid bin Al-Walid: 

     That he went with Allah's Apostle to the house of
     Maimuna, who was his and Ibn 'Abbas' aunt. He
     found with her a roasted mastigure which her
     sister Hufaida bint Al-Harith had brought from
     Najd. Maimuna presented the mastigure before
     Allah's Apostle who rarely started eating any
     (unfamiliar) food before it was described and
     named for him. (But that time) Allah's Apostle
     stretched his hand towards the (meat of the)
     mastigure whereupon a lady from among those
     who were present, said, "You should inform
     Allah's Apostle of what you have presented to
     him. O Allah's Apostle! It is the meat of a
     mastigure." (On learning that) Allah's Apostle
     withdrew his hand from the meat of the
     mastigure. Khalid bin Al-Walid said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Is this unlawful to eat?" Allah's Apostle
     replied, "No, but it is not found in the land of my
     people, so I do not like it." Khalid said, "Then I
     pulled the mastigure (meat) towards me and ate it
     while Allah's Apostle was looking at me. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 304: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The food for two persons
     is sufficient for three, and the food of three
     persons is sufficient for four persons." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 305: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Ibn 'Umar never used to take his meal unless a
     poor man was called to eat with him. One day I
     brought a poor man to eat with him, the man ate
     too much, whereupon Ibn 'Umar said, "O Nafi'!
     Don't let this man enter my house, for I heard the
     Prophet saying, "A believer eats in one intestine
     (is satisfied with a little food), and a kafir
     (unbeliever) eats in seven intestines (eats much
     food)." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 306: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A believer eats in one
     intestine (is satisfied with a little food), and a kafir
     (unbeliever) or a hypocrite eats in seven
     intestines (eats too much)." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 307: 

     Narrated 'Amr: 

     Abu Nahik was avaricious eater. Ibn 'Umar said
     to him, "Allah's Apostle said, "A Kafir
     (unbeliever) eats in seven intestines (eats much)."
     On that Abu Nahik said, "But I believe in Allah
     and His Apostle ." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 308: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A Muslim eats in one
     intestine (i.e. he is satisfied with a little food)
     while a Kafir (unbeliever) eats in seven intestines
     (eats much)." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 309: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man used to eat much, but when he embraced
     Islam, he started eating less. That was mentioned
     to the Prophet who then said, "A believer eats in
     one intestine (is satisfied with a little food) and a
     Kafir eats in seven intestines (eats much). " 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 310: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "I do not take my meals
     while leaning (against something). 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 311: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     While I was with the Prophet he said to a man
     who was with him, "I do not take my meals while
     leaning." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 312: 

     Narrated Khalid bin Al-Walid: 

     "A roasted mastigure was brought to the Prophet
     who stretched his hand towards it to eat it. But it
     was said to him, "It is a mastigure." So he
     withdrew his hand. Khalid asked, "Is it unlawful
     to eat?" the Prophet said, "No, but it is not found
     in the land of my people and that is why I do not
     like eating it." So Khalid started eating (it) while
     Allah's Apostle was looking at him. An-Nadr
     said: 'Al-Khazira' (is prepared) from bran while
     'Al-Harira' is prepared from milk. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 313: 

     Narrated 'Urban bin Malik: 

     who attended the Badr battle and was from the
     Ansar, that he came to the Prophet and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I have lost my eyesight and I
     lead my people in the prayer (as an Imam).
     When it rains, the valley which is between me
     and my people, flows with water, and then I
     cannot go to their mosque to lead them in the
     prayer. O Allah's Apostle! I wish that you could
     come and pray in my house so that I may take it
     as a praying place. The Prophet said, "Allah
     willing, I will do that." The next morning, soon
     after the sun had risen, Allah's Apostle came with
     Abu Bakr. The Prophet asked for the permission
     to enter and I admitted him. The Prophet had not
     sat till he had entered the house and said to me,
     "Where do you like me to pray in your house?" I
     pointed at a place in my house whereupon he
     stood and said, "Allahu Akbar." We lined behind
     him and he prayed two Rakat and finished it with
     Taslim. We then requested him to stay for a
     special meal of Khazira which we had prepared.
     A large number of men from the adjoining area
     gathered in the house. One of them said, "Where
     is Malik bin Ad-Dukhshun?" Another man said,
     "He is a hypocrite and does not love Allah and
     His Apostle." The Prophet said, "Do not say so.
     Do you not think that he has said: "None has the
     right to be worshipped but Allah," seeking Allah's
     pleasure? The man said, "Allah and His Apostle
     know better, but we have always seen him
     mixing with hypocrites and giving them advice."
     The Prophet said, "Allah has forbidden the (Hell)
     Fire for those who testify that none has the right
     to be worshipped but Allah, seeking Allah's
     pleasure. " 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 314: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     My aunt presented (roasted) mastigures, Iqt and
     milk to the Prophet . The mastigures were put on
     his dining sheet, and if it was unlawful to eat, it
     would not have been put there. The Prophet
     drank the milk and ate the Iqt only. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 315: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     We used to be happy on Fridays, for there was
     an old lady who used to pull out the roots of Silq
     and put it in a cooking pot with some barley.
     When we had finished the prayer, we would visit
     her and she would present that dish before us.
     So we used to be happy on Fridays because of
     that, and we never used to take our meals or
     have a mid-day nap except after the Friday
     prayer. By Allah, that meal contained no fat. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 316: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet ate of the meat of a shoulder (by
     cutting the meat with his teeth), and then got up
     and offered the prayer without performing the
     ablution anew. Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: The
     Prophet took out a bone with meat on it from a
     cooking pot and ate of it, and then offered the
     prayer without performing ablution anew. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 317: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     We went out towards Mecca with the Prophet. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 318: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     Once, while I was sitting with the companions of
     the Prophet at a station on the road to Mecca
     and Allah's Apostle was stationing ahead of us
     and all the people were assuming Ihram while I
     was not. My companion, saw an onager while I
     was busy Mending my shoes. They did not
     Inform me of the onager but they wished that I
     would see it Suddenly I looked and saw the
     onager Then I headed towards my horse,
     saddled it and rode, but I forgot to take the lash
     and the spear. So I said to them my
     companions), "Give me the lash and the spear."
     But they said, "No, by Allah we will not help you
     in any way to hunt it ' I got angry, dismounted,
     took it the spear and the lash), rode (the horse
     chased the onager and wounded it Then I
     brought it when it had dyed. My companions
     started eating of its (cooked) meat, but they
     suspected that it might be unlawful to eat of its
     meat while they were in a state of Ihram Then I
     proceeded further and I kept one of its forelegs
     with me. When we met Allah's Apostle we asked
     him about that. He said, "Have you some of its
     meat with you?" I gave him that foreleg and he
     ate the meat till he stripped the bone of its flesh
     although he was in a state of Ihram. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 319: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Umaiyya 

     that he saw the Prophet holding a shoulder piece
     of mutton in his hand and cutting part of it with a
     knife. Then he was called for the prayer
     whereupon he put down the shoulder piece and
     the knife with which he was cutting it, and then
     stood for prayer without performing ablution
     again. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 320: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet never criticized any food (he was
     invited to) but he used to eat if he liked the food,
     and leave it if he disliked 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 321: 

     Narrated Abu Hazim: 

     that he asked Sahl, "Did you use white flour
     during the lifetime of the Prophet ?" Sahl replied,
     "No. Hazim asked, "Did you use to sift barley
     flour?" He said, "No, but we used to blow off the
     husk (of the barley)." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 322: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Once the Prophet distributed dates among his
     companions and gave each one seven dates. He
     gave me seven dates too, one of which was dry
     and hard, but none of the other dates was more
     liked by me than that one, for it prolonged my
     chewing it. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 323: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     I was one of (the first) seven (who had embraced
     Islam) with Allah's Apostle and we had nothing
     to eat then, except the leaves of the Habala or
     Hubula tree, so that our stool used to be similar
     to that of sheep. Now the tribe of Bani Asad
     wants to teach me Islam; I would be a loser and
     all my efforts would be in vain (if I learn Islam
     anew from them). 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 324: 

     Narrated Abu Hazim: 

     I asked Sahl bin Sad, "Did Allah's Apostle ever
     eat white flour?" Sahl said, "Allah's Apostle never
     saw white flour since Allah sent him as an
     Apostle till He took him unto Him." I asked, "Did
     the people have (use) sieves during the lifetime of
     Allah's Apostle?" Sahl said, "Allah's Apostle
     never saw (used) a sieve since Allah sent him as
     an Apostle until He took him unto Him," I said,
     "How could you eat barley unsifted?" he said,
     "We used to grind it and then blow off its husk,
     and after the husk flew away, we used to
     prepare the dough (bake) and eat it." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 325: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     that he passed by a group of people in front of
     whom there was a roasted sheep. They invited
     him but he refused to eat and said, "Allah's
     Apostle left this world without satisfying his
     hunger even with barley bread." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 326: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet never took his meals at a dining
     table, nor in small plates, and he never ate thin
     well-baked bread. (The sub-narrator asked
     Qatada, "Over what did they use to take their
     meals?" Qatada said, "On leather dining sheets." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 327: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The family of Muhammad had not eaten wheat
     bread to their satisfaction for three consecutive
     days since his arrival at Medina till he died. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 328: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) that whenever one of
     her relatives died, the women assembled and
     then dispersed (returned to their houses) except
     her relatives and close friends. She would order
     that a pot of Talbina be cooked. Then Tharid (a
     dish prepared from meat and bread) would be
     prepared and the Talbina would be poured on it.
     'Aisha would say (to the women),"Eat of it, for I
     heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'The Talbina
     soothes the heart of the patient and relieves him
     from some of his sadness.' " 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 329: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari: 

     The Prophet said, "Many men reached perfection
     but none among the women reached perfection
     except Mary, the daughter of ' Imran, and Asia,
     Pharoah's wife. And the superiority of 'Aisha to
     other women is like the superiority of Tharid to
     other kinds of food. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 330: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "The superiority of 'Aisha to
     other women is like the superiority of Tharid to
     other kinds of food . " 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 331: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I went along with the Prophet to the house of a
     young tailor of his. The tailor presented a dish of
     Tharid to the Prophet and resumed his work.
     The Prophet started picking the pieces of gourd
     and I too, started picking them and putting it
     before him. Since then I have always loved (to
     eat) gourd. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 332: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     We used to visit Anas bin Malik while his baker
     was standing (and baking). Anas would say,
     "Eat! I do not know that the Prophet had ever
     seen well-baked bread till he met Allah, nor had
     he ever seen a roasted sheep with his own eyes."


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 333: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Umaiyay Ad-Damri: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle cutting part of the shoulder
     of mutton with a knife. He ate of it and then was
     called for prayer whereupon he got up and put
     down the knife and offered the prayer without
     performing new ablution. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 334: 

     Narrated 'Abis: 

     I asked 'Aisha "Did the Prophet forbid eating the
     meat of sacrifices offered on 'Id-ul-Adha for
     more than three days" She said, "The Prophet
     did not do this except in the year when the
     people were hungry, so he wanted the rich to
     feed the poor. But later we used to store even a
     trotter of a sheep to eat it fifteen days later." She
     was asked, "What compelled you to do so?" She
     smiled and said, "The family of Muhammad did
     not eat to their satisfaction white bread with meat
     soup for three successive days till he met Allah." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 335: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     We used to carry the meat of the Hadis
     (sacrificed animals) to Medina during the life-time
     of the Prophet . 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 336: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said to Abu Talha, "Seek one of
     your boys to serve me." Abu Talha mounted me
     behind him (on his riding animal) and took me (to
     the Prophet ). So I used to serve Allah's Apostle
     whenever he dismounted (to stay somewhere). I
     used to hear him saying very often, "O Allah! I
     seek refuge with You from, having worries
     sadness, helplessness, laziness, miserliness,
     cowardice, from being heavily in debt and from
     being overpowered by other persons unjustly." I
     kept on serving till we -returned from the battle
     of Khaibar. The Prophet then brought Safiyya
     bint Huyai whom he had won from the war
     booty. I saw him folding up a gown or a garment
     for her to sit on behind him (on his she-camel).
     When he reached As-Sahba', he prepared Hais
     and placed it on a dining sheet. Then he sent me
     to invite men, who (came and) ate; and that was
     his and Safiyya's wedding banquet. Then the
     Prophet proceeded, and when he saw (noticed)
     the mountain of Uhud, he said, "This mountain
     loves us, and we love it." When we approached
     Medina, he said, "O Allah! I make the area
     between its two mountains a sanctuary as
     Abraham has made Mecca a sanctuary. O Allah!
     Bless their Mudd and Sa (special kinds of
     measure)." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 337: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Laila: 

     We were sitting in the company of Hudhaifa who
     asked for water and a Magian brought him
     water. But when he placed the cup in his hand,
     he threw it at him and said, "Had I not forbidden
     him to do so more than once or twice?" He
     wanted to say, "I would not have done so,"
     adding, "but I heard the Prophet saying, "Do not
     wear silk or Dibaja, and do not drink in silver or
     golden vessels, and do not eat in plates of such
     metals, for such things are for the unbelievers in
     this worldly life and for us in the Hereafter." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 338: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The example of a Believer
     who recites the Quran, is that of a citron which
     smells good and tastes good; And the example of
     a Believer who does not recite the Quran, is that
     of a date which has no smell but tastes sweet;
     and the example of a hypocrite who recites the
     Quran, is that of an aromatic plant which smells
     good but tastes bitter; and the example of a
     hypocrite who does not recite the Quran, is that
     of a colocynth plant which has no smell and is
     bitter in taste." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 339: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "The superiority of 'Aisha to
     other ladies is like the superiority of Tharid to
     other kinds of food." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 340: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Traveling is a kind of torture,
     as it prevents one from sleeping and eating! So
     when one has finished his job, he should return
     quickly to his family." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 341: 

     Narrated Qasim bin Muhammad: 

     Three traditions have been established because
     of Barira: 'Aisha intended to buy her and set her
     free, but Barira's masters said, "Her wala' will be
     for us." 'Aisha mentioned that to Allah's Apostle
     who said, "You could accept their condition if
     you wished, for the wala is for the one who
     manumits the slave." Barira was manumitted, then
     she was given the choice either to stay with her
     husband or leave him; One day Allah's Apostle
     entered 'Aisha's house while there was a cooking
     pot of food boiling on the fire. The Prophet
     asked for lunch, and he was presented with
     bread and some extra food from the home-made
     Udm (e.g. soup). He asked, "Don't I see meat
     (being cooked)?" They said, "Yes, O Allah's
     Apostle! But it is the meat that has been given to
     Barira in charity and she has given it to us as a
     present." He said, "For Barira it is alms, but for
     us it is a present." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 342: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to love sweet edible things
     and honey. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 343: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I used to accompany Allah's Apostle to fill my
     stomach; and that was when I did not eat baked
     bread, nor wear silk. Neither a male nor a female
     slave used to serve me, and I used to bind stones
     over my belly and ask somebody to recite a
     Quranic Verse for me though I knew it, so that
     he might take me to his house and feed me. Ja'far
     bin Abi Talib was very kind to the poor, and he
     used to take us and feed us with what ever was
     available in his house, (and if nothing was
     available), he used to give us the empty (honey
     or butter) skin which we would tear and lick
     whatever was in it. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 344: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle went to (the house of) his slave
     tailor, and he was offered (a dish of) gourd of
     which he started eating. I have loved to eat gourd
     since I saw Allah's Apostle eating it. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 345: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari: 

     There was a man called Abu Shu'aib, and he had
     a slave who was a butcher. He said (to his
     slave), "Prepare a meal to which I may invite
     Allah's Apostle along with four other men." So he
     invited Allah's Apostle and four other men, but
     another man followed them whereupon the
     Prophet said, "You have invited me as one of five
     guests, but now another man has followed us. If
     you wish you can admit him, and if you wish you
     can refuse him." On that the host said, "But I
     admit him." Narrated Muhammad bin Isma'il: If
     guests are sitting at a dining table, they do not
     have the right to carry food from other tables to
     theirs, but they can pass on food from their own
     table to each other; otherwise they should leave
     it. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 346: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I was a young boy when I once was walking with
     Allah's Apostle . Allah's Apostle entered the
     house of his slave tailor and the latter brought a
     dish filled with food covered with pieces of
     gourd. Allah's Apostle started picking and eating
     the gourd. When I saw that, I started collecting
     and placing the gourd before him. Then the slave
     returned to his work. Anas added: I have kept
     on loving gourd since I saw Allah's Apostle doing
     what he was doing. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 347: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     A tailor invited the Prophet to a meal which he
     had prepared, and I went along with the Prophet
     . The tailor presented barley bread and soup
     containing gourd and cured meat. I saw the
     Prophet picking the pieces of gourd from around
     the dish, and since then I have kept on liking
     gourd. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 348: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I saw the Prophet being served with soup and
     containing gourd and cured meat, and I saw him
     picking and eating the pieces of gourd. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 349: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet did not do that (i.e., forbade the
     storage of the meat of sacrifices for three days)
     except (he did so) so that the rich would feed the
     poor. But later we used to keep even trotters to
     cook, fifteen days later. The family of
     Muhammad did not eat wheat bread with meat
     or soup to their satisfaction for three successive
     days. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 350: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     A tailor invited Allah's Apostle to a meal which
     he had prepared. I went with Allah's Apostle to
     that meal, and the tailor served the Prophet with
     barley bread and soup of gourd and cured meat.
     I saw Allah's Apostle picking the pieces of gourd
     from around the dish, and since then I have kept
     on liking gourd. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 351: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ja'far bin Abi Talib: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle eating fresh dates with
     snake cucumber. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 352: 

     Narrated Abu 'Uthman: 

     I was a guest of Abu Huraira for seven days.
     Abu Huraira, his wife and his slave used to get
     up and remain awake for one-third of the night
     by turns. Each would offer the night prayer and
     then awaken the other. I heard Abu Huraira
     saying, "Allah's Apostle distributed dates among
     his companions and my share was seven dates,
     one of which was a Hashafa (a date which dried
     on the tree before it was fully ripe). 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 353: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet distributed dates among us, and my
     share was five dates, four of which were good,
     and one was a ,Hashafa, and I found the Hashafa
     the hardest for my teeth. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 354: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     There was a Jew in Medina who used to lend me
     money up to the season of plucking dates. (Jabir
     had a piece of land which was on the way to
     Ruma). That year the land was not promising, so
     the payment of the debt was delayed one year.
     The Jew came to me at the time of plucking, but
     gathered nothing from my land. I asked him to
     give me one year respite, but he refused. This
     news reached the Prophet whereupon he said to
     his companions, "Let us go and ask the Jew for
     respite for Jabir." All of them came to me in my
     garden, and the Prophet started speaking to the
     Jew, but he Jew said, "O Abu Qasim! I will not
     grant him respite." When the Prophet saw the
     Jew's attitude, he stood up and walked all
     around the garden and came again and talked to
     the Jew, but the Jew refused his request. I got up
     and brought some ripe fresh dates and put it in
     front of the Prophet. He ate and then said to me,
     "Where is your hut, O Jabir?" I informed him,
     and he said, "Spread out a bed for me in it." I
     spread out a bed, and he entered and slept.
     When he woke up, I brought some dates to him
     again and he ate of it and then got up and talked
     to the Jew again, but the Jew again refused his
     request. Then the Prophet got up for the second
     time amidst the palm trees loaded with fresh
     dates, and said, "O Jabir! Pluck dates to repay
     your debt." The Jew remained with me while I
     was plucking the dates, till I paid him all his right,
     yet there remained extra quantity of dates. So I
     went out and proceeded till I reached the
     Prophet and informed him of the good news,
     whereupon he said, "I testify that I am Allah's
     Apostle." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 355: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     While we were sitting with the Prophet a spadix
     of palm tree was brought to him. The Prophet
     said, "There is a tree among the trees which is as
     blessed as a Muslim" I thought that it was the
     date palm tree and intended to say, "It is the
     date-palm tree, O Allah's Apostle!" but I looked
     behind to see that I was the tenth and youngest
     of ten men present there, so I kept quiet' Then
     the Prophet said, "It is the datepalm tree." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 356: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "He who eats seven 'Ajwa
     dates every morning, will not be affected by
     poison or magic on the day he eats them." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 357: 

     Narrated Jabala bin Suhaim. 

     At the time of Ibn Az-Zubair, we were struck
     with famine, and he provided us with dates for
     our food. 'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to pass by us
     while we were eating, and say, "Do not eat two
     dates together at a time, for the Prophet forbade
     the taking of two dates together at a time (in a
     gathering)." Ibn 'Umar used to add, "Unless one
     takes the permission of one's companions." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 358: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ja'far: 

     I saw the Prophet eating fresh dates with snake
     cucumbers. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 359: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "There is a tree among the
     trees which is similar to a Muslim (in goodness),
     and that is the date palm tree." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 360: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ja'far: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle eating fresh dates with
     snake cucumbers. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 361: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     My mother, Um Sulaim, took a Mudd of barley
     grain, ground it and made porridge from it, and
     pressed (over it), a butter skin she had with her.
     Then she sent me to the Prophet, and I reached
     him while he was sitting with his companions. I
     invited him, whereupon he said, "And those who
     are with me?' I returned and said, "He says, 'And
     those who are with me?" Abu Talha went out to
     him and said, "O Allah's Apostle! It is just a meal
     prepared by Um Sulaim." The Prophet entered
     and the food was brought to him. He said, "Let
     ten persons enter upon me." Those ten entered
     and ate their fill. Again he said, 'Let ten (more)
     enter upon me." Those ten entered and ate their
     fill. Then he said, "Let ten (more) enter upon me."
     He called forty persons in all Then Allah's
     Apostle ate and got up. I started looking (at the
     food) to see if it decreased or not. 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 362: 

     Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz: 

     It was said to Anas "What did you hear the
     Prophet saying about garlic?" Anas replied,
     "Whoever has eaten (garlic) should not approach
     our mosque." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 363: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever has eaten garlic or
     onion should keep away from us (or should keep
     away from our mosque).' 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 364: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     We were with Allah's Apostle collecting
     Al-Kabath at Mar-Az-Zahran. The Prophet said,
     "Collect the black ones, for they are better."
     Somebody said, (O Allah's Apostle!) Have you
     ever shepherded sheep?" He said, "There has
     been no prophet but has shepherded them. " 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 365: 

     Narrated Suwaid bin An Nu'man: 

     We went out with Allah's Apostle to Khaibar,
     and when we reached As-Sahba', the Prophet
     asked for food, and he was offered nothing but
     Sawiq. We ate, and then Allah's Apostle stood
     up for the prayer. He rinsed his mouth with
     water, and we too, rinsed our mouths. Narrated
     Suwaid; We went out with Allah's Apostle to
     Khaibar. and when we reached As-Sahba',
     which (Yahya says) is one day' journey from
     Khaibar, the Prophet asked for food, and he was
     offered nothing but Sawiq which we chewed and
     ate. Then the Prophet asked for water and rinsed
     his mouth, and we too, rinsed our mouths along
     with him. He then led us in the Maghrib prayer
     without performing ablution again 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 366: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, 'When you eat, do not wipe
     your hands till you have licked it, or had it licked
     by somebody else." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 367: 

     Narrated Said bin Al-Harith: 

     that he asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah about
     performing ablution after taking a cooked meal.
     He replied, "It is not essential," and added, "We
     never used to get such kind of food during the
     lifetime of the Prophet except rarely; and if at all
     we got such a dish, we did not have any
     handkerchiefs to wipe our hands with except the
     palms of our hands, our forearms and our feet.
     We would perform the prayer thereafter with-out
     performing new ablution." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 368: 

     Narrated Abu Umama: 

     Whenever the dining sheet of the Prophet was
     taken away (i.e., whenever he finished his meal),
     he used to say: "Al-hamdu lillah kathiran taiyiban
     mubarakan fihi ghaira makfiy wala muwada' wala
     mustaghna'anhu Rabbuna." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 369: 

     Narrated Abu Umama: 

     Whenever the Prophet finished his meals (or
     when his dining sheet was taken away), he used
     to say. "Praise be to Allah Who has satisfied our
     needs and quenched our thirst. Your favor
     cannot by compensated or denied." Once he
     said, upraise be to You, O our Lord! Your favor
     cannot be compensated, nor can be left, nor can
     be dispensed with, O our Lord!" 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 370: 

     Narrated .Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "When your servant brings
     your food to you, if you do not ask him to join
     you, then at least ask him to take one or two
     handfuls, for he has suffered from its heat (while
     cooking it) and has taken pains to cook it nicely."


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 371: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari: 

     There was an Ansari man nicknamed, Abu
     Shu'aib, who had a slave who was a butcher. He
     came to the Prophet while he was sitting with his
     companions and noticed the signs of hunger on
     the face of the Prophet . So he went to his
     butcher slave and said, "Prepare for me a meal
     sufficient for five persons so that I may invite the
     Prophet along with four other men." He had the
     meal prepared for him and invited him. A (sixth)
     man followed them. The Prophet said, "O Abu
     Shu'aib! Another man has followed us. If you
     wish, you may invite him; and if you wish, you
     may refuse him." Abu Shu'aib said, "No, I will
     admit him." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 372: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Umaiyya: 

     that he saw Allah's Apostle cutting a piece of
     mutton from its shoulder part he was carrying in
     his hand. When he was called for prayer, he put
     it down and the knife with which he was cutting
     it. Then he stood up and offered the prayer
     without performing new ablution 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 373r: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, If supper is served and the
     Iqama for (Isha) prayer is proclaimed, start with
     you supper first." 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 373i: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Once Ibn Umar was taking his supper while he
     was listening to the recitation of (Quran by) the
     Imam (in the Isha prayer). 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 374: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "If the Iqama for ('Isha')
     prayer is proclaimed and supper is served, take
     your supper first " 


Volume 7, Book 65, Number 375: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I know (about) the Hijab (the order of veiling of
     women) more than anybody else. Ubai bin Ka'b
     used to ask me about it. Allah's Apostle became
     the bridegroom of Zainab bint Jahsh whom he
     married at Medina. After the sun had risen high in
     the sky, the Prophet invited the people to a meal.
     Allah's Apostle remained sitting and some people
     remained sitting with him after the other guests
     had left. Then Allah's Apostle got up and went
     away, and I too, followed him till he reached the
     door of 'Aisha's room. Then he thought that the
     people must have left the place by then, so he
     returned and I also returned with him. Behold,
     the people were still sitting at their places. So he
     went back again for the second time, and I went
     along with him too. When we reached the door
     of 'Aisha's room, he returned and I also returned
     with him to see that the people had left.
     Thereupon the Prophet hung a curtain between
     me and him and the Verse regarding the order
     for (veiling of women) Hijab was revealed. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 66: 

    Sacrifice on Occasion of Birth (`Aqiqa) 



Volume 7, Book 66, Number 376: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     A son was born to me and I took him to the Prophet who named him Ibrahim, did
     Tahnik for him with a date, invoked Allah to bless him and returned him to me.
     (The narrator added: That was Abu Musa's eldest son.) 


Volume 7, Book 66, Number 377: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     A boy was brought to the Prophet to do Tahnik for him, but the boy urinated on
     him, whereupon the Prophet had water poured on the place of urine. 


Volume 7, Book 66, Number 378: 

     Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr: 

     I conceived 'Abdullah bin AzZubair at Mecca and went out (of Mecca) while I
     was about to give birth. I came to Medina and encamped at Quba', and gave birth
     at Quba'. Then I brought the child to Allah's Apostle and placed it (on his lap). He
     asked for a date, chewed it, and put his saliva in the mouth of the child. So the first
     thing to enter its stomach was the saliva of Allah's Apostle. Then he did its Tahnik
     with a date, and invoked Allah to bless him. It was the first child born in the Islamic
     era, therefore they (Muslims) were very happy with its birth, for it had been said to
     them that the Jews had bewitched them, and so they would not produce any
     offspring. 


Volume 7, Book 66, Number 379p: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Abu Talha had a child who was sick. Once, while Abu Talha was out, the child
     died. When Abu Talha returned home, he asked, "How does my son fare?" Um
     Salaim (his wife) replied, "He is quieter than he has ever been." Then she brought
     supper for him and he took his supper and slept with her. When he had finished,
     she said (to him), "Bury the child (as he's dead)." Next morning Abu Talha came to
     Allah's Apostle and told him about that. The Prophet said (to him), "Did you sleep
     with your wife last night?" Abu Talha said, "Yes". The Prophet said, "O Allah!
     Bestow your blessing on them as regards that night of theirs." Um Sulaim gave birth
     to a boy. Abu Talha told me to take care of the child till it was taken to the
     Prophet. Then Abu Talha took the child to the Prophet and Um Sulaim sent some
     dates along with the child. The Prophet took the child (on his lap) and asked if
     there was something with him. The people replied, "Yes, a few dates." The
     Prophet took a date, chewed it, took some of it out of his mouth, put it into the
     child's mouth and did Tahnik for him with that, and named him 'Abdullah. 


Volume 7, Book 66, Number 379i: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     As above. 


Volume 7, Book 66, Number 380: 

     Narrated Salman bin 'Amir Ad-Dabbi: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "'Aqiqa is to be offered for a (newly born) boy, so
     slaughter (an animal) for him, and relieve him of his suffering." (Note: It has been
     quoted in Fateh-AL-Bari that the majority of the Religious Scholars agrees to the
     Hadith narrated in Sahih At-TlRMlZY that the Prophet was asked about Aqiqa
     and he ordered 2 sheep for a boy and one sheep for a girl and that is his tradition
     "SUNNA".) 


Volume 7, Book 66, Number 381: 

     Narrated Habib bin Ash-Shahid: 

     Ibn Sirin told me to ask Al-Hassan from whom he had heard the narration of
     'Aqiqa. I asked him and he said, "From Samura bin Jundab."

Volume 7, Book 66, Number 382: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Neither Fara' nor 'Atira (is permissible):" Al-Fara' nor 'Atira (is
     permissible):" Al-Fara' was the first offspring (of camels or sheep) which the
     pagans used to offer (as a sacrifice) to their idols. And Al-'Atira was (a sheep
     which was to be slaughtered) during the month of Rajab. 


Volume 7, Book 66, Number 383: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Neither Fara' nor 'Atira) is permissible)." Al-Fara' was the first
     offspring (they got of camels or sheep) which they (pagans) used to offer (as a
     sacrifice) to their idols. 'Atira was (a sheep which used to be slaughtered) during
     the month of Rajab. 

Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 67: 

                 Hunting, Slaughtering 



Volume 7, Book 67, Number 384: 

     Narrated Adi bin Hatim: 

     I asked the Prophet about the game killed by a Mi'rad (i.e. a sharp-edged piece of
     wood or a piece of wood provided with a sharp piece of iron used for hunting). He
     said, "If the game is killed with its sharp edge, eat of it, but if it is killed with its
     shaft, with a hit by its broad side then the game is (unlawful to eat) for it has been
     beaten to death." I asked him about the game killed by a trained hound. He said,
     "If the hound catches the game for you, eat of it, for killing the game by the hound,
     is like its slaughtering. But if you see with your hound or hounds another dog, and
     you are afraid that it might have shared in hunting the game with your hound and
     killed it, then you should not eat of it, because you have mentioned Allah's name on
     (sending) your hound only, but you have not mentioned it on some other hound 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 385: 

     Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim: 

     I asked Allah's Apostle about the Mi'rad. He said, "If you hit the game with its
     sharp edge, eat it, but if the Mi'rad hits the game with its shaft with a hit by its
     broad side do not eat it, for it has been beaten to death with a piece of wood. (i.e.
     unlawful)." I asked, "If I let loose my trained hound after a game?" He said, "If you
     let loose your trained hound after game, and mention the name of Allah, then you
     can eat." I said, "If the hound eats of the game?" He said "Then you should not eat
     of it, for the hound has hunted the game for itself and not for you." I said, "Some
     times I send my hound and then I find some other hound with it?" He said "Don't
     eat the game, as you have mentioned the Name of Allah on your dog only and not
     on the other." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 386: 

     Narrated Adi bin Hatim: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! We let loose our trained hounds after a game?" He said,
     "Eat what they hunt for you." I said, "Even if they killed (the game)?" He replied,
     'Even if they killed (the game)." I said, 'We also hit (the game) with the Mi'rad?"
     He said, "Eat of the animal which the Mi'rad kills by piercing its body, but do not
     eat of the animal which is killed by the broad side of the Mi'rad.'' 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 387: 

     Narrated Abu Tha'laba Al-Khushani: 

     I said, "O Allah's Prophet! We are living in a land ruled by the people of the
     Scripture; Can we take our meals in their utensils? In that land there is plenty of
     game and I hunt the game with my bow and with my hound that is not trained and
     with my trained hound. Then what is lawful for me to eat?" He said, "As for what
     you have mentioned about the people of the Scripture, if you can get utensils other
     than theirs, do not eat out of theirs, but if you cannot get other than theirs, wash
     their utensils and eat out of it. If you hunt an animal with your bow after mentioning
     Allah's Name, eat of it. and if you hunt something with your trained hound after
     mentioning Allah's Name, eat of it, and if you hunt something with your untrained
     hound (and get it before it dies) and slaughter it, eat of it." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 388: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Maghaffal: 

     that he saw a man throwing stones with two fingers (at something) and said to him,
     "Do not throw stones, for Allah's Apostle has forbidden throwing stones, or e used
     to dislike it." 'Abdullah added: Throwing stones will neither hunt the game, nor kill
     (or hurt) an enemy, but it may break a tooth or gouge out an eye." Afterwards
     'Abdullah once again saw the man throwing stones. He said to him, "I tell you that
     Allah's Apostle has forbidden or disliked the throwing the stones (in such a way),
     yet you are throwing stones! I shall not talk to you for such-and-such a period." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 389: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever keeps a (pet) dog which is neither a watch dog nor a
     hunting dog, will get a daily deduction of two Qirat from his good deeds." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 390: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "If someone keeps a dog neither for hunting, nor for
     guarding livestock, the reward (for his good deeds) will be reduced by two Qirats
     per day." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 391: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If someone keeps a dog neither for guarding livestock, nor
     for hunting, his good deeds will decrease (in reward) by two Qirats a day.' 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 392: 

     Narrated Adi bin Hatim: 

     I asked Allah's Apostle. "We hunt with the help of these hounds." He said, "If you
     let loose your trained hounds after a game, and mention the name of Allah, then
     you can eat what the hounds catch for you, even if they killed the game. But you
     should not eat of it if the hound has eaten of it, for then it is likely that the hound has
     caught the game for itself. And if other hounds join your hound in hunting the game,
     then do not eat of it." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 393: 

     Narrated Adi bin Hatim: 

     The Prophet said, "If you let loose your hound after a game and mention Allah's
     Name on sending it, and the hound catches the game and kills it, then you can eat
     of it. But if the hound eats of it, then you should not eat thereof, for the hound has
     caught it for itself. And if along with your hound, join other hounds, and Allah's
     Name was not mentioned at the time of their sending, and they catch an animal and
     kill it, you should not ea: of it, for you will not know which of them has killed it.
     And if you have thrown an arrow at the game and then find it (dead) two or three
     days later and, it bears no mark other than the wound inflicted by your arrow, then
     you can eat of it. But if the game is found (dead) in water, then do not eat of it."
     And it has also been narrated by 'Adi bin Hatim that he asked the Prophet "If a
     hunter throws an arrow at the game and after tracing it for two or three days he
     finds it dead but still bearing his arrow, (can he eat of it)?" The Prophet replied,
     "He can eat if he wishes." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 394: 

     Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I let loose my hound after a game and mention Allah's
     Name on sending it." The Prophet said, "If you let loose your hound after a game
     and you mention Allah's Name on sending it and the hound catches and kills the
     game and eats of it, then you should not eat of it, for it has killed it for itself." I said,
     "Sometimes when I send my hound after a game, I find another hound along with it
     and I do not know which of them has caught the game." He said, "You must not
     eat of it because you have not mentioned, the Name of Allah except on sending
     your own hound, and you did not mention it on the other hound." Then I asked him
     about the game hunted with a Mi'rad (i.e. a sharp edged piece of wood or a piece
     of wood provided with a sharp piece of iron used for hunting). He said, "If the
     game is killed with its sharp edge, you can eat of it, but if it is killed by its broad
     side (shaft), you cannot eat of it, for then it is like an animal beaten to death with a
     pie 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 395: 

     Narrated Adi Bin Hatim: 

     I asked Allah's Apostle, "We hunt with these hounds." He said, "If you send your
     trained hounds after a game and mention Allah's Name on sending, you can eat of
     what they catch for you. But if the hound eats of the game, then you must not eat of
     it, for I am afraid that the hound caught it for itself, and if another hound joins your
     hounds (during the hunt), you should not eat of the game." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 396: 

     Narrated Abu Tha'laba Al-Khushani: 

     I came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are living in the land of
     the people of the Scripture and we take our meals in their utensils, and in the land
     there is game and I hunt with my bow and trained or untrained hounds; please tell
     me what is lawful for us of that." He said, "As for your saying that you are living in
     the land of the people of the Scripture and that you eat in their utensils, if you can
     get utensils other than theirs, do not eat in their utensils, but if you do not find (other
     than theirs), then wash their utensils and eat in them. As for your saying that you
     are in the land of game, if you hung something with your bow, and have mentioned
     Allah's Name while hunting, then you can eat (the game). And if you hunt
     something with your trained hound, and have mentioned Allah's Name on sending it
     for hunting then you can eat (the game). But if you hunt something with your
     untrained hound and you were able to slaughter it before its death, you can eat of
     it." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 397: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     We provoked a rabbit at Marr Az-Zahran till it started jumping. My companions
     chased it till they got tired. But I alone ran after it and caught it and brought it to
     Abu Talha. He sent both its legs to the Prophet who accepted them. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 398: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     that once he was with Allah's Apostle (on the way to Mecca). When he had
     covered some of the way to Mecca, he and some companions of his, who were in
     the state of lhram. remained behind the Prophet while Abu Qatada himself was not
     in the state of Ihram. Abu Qatada, seeing an onager rode his horse and asked his
     companions to hand him a whip, but they refused. He then asked them to hand him
     his spear, but they refused. Then he took it himself and attacked the onager and
     killed it. Some of the Companions of Allah's Apostle ate of it, but some others
     refused to eat. When they met Allah's Apostle they asked him about that. He said,
     "It was meal given to you by Allah." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 399: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     (the same Hadith above, but he added); The Prophet asked, "Is there any of its
     meat left with you?" 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 400: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     I was with the Prophet (on a journey) between Mecca and Medina, and all of
     them, (i.e. the Prophet and his companions) were in the state of Ihram, while I was
     not in that state. I was riding my horse and I used to be fond of ascending
     mountains. So while I was doing so I noticed that the people were looking at
     something. I went to see what it was, and behold it was an onager. I asked my
     companions, "What is that?" They said, "We do not know." I said, "It is an onager.'
     They said, "It is what you have seen." I had left my whip, so I said to them, "Hand
     to me my whip." They said, "We will not help you in that (in hunting the onager)." I
     got down, took my whip and chased the animal (on my horse) and did not stop till
     I killed it. I went to them and said, "Come on, carry it!" But they said, "We will not
     even touch it." At last I alone carried it and brought it to them. Some of them ate of
     it and some refused to eat of it. I said (to them), "I will ask the Prophet about it (on
     your behalf)." When I met the Prophet, I told him the whole story. He said to me,
     "Has anything of it been left with you?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Eat, for it is a meal
     Allah has offered to you." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 401: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     We went out in a campaign and the army was called The Army of the Khabt, and
     Abu 'Ubaida was our commander. We were struck with severe hunger. Then the
     sea threw a huge dead fish called Al-'Anbar, the like of which had never been
     seen. We ate of it for half a month, and then Abu 'Ubaida took one of its bones
     (and made an arch of it) so that a rider could easily pass under it. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 402: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet sent us as an army unit of three hundred warriors under the command
     of Abu 'Ubaida to ambush a caravan of the Quraish. But we were struck with such
     severe hunger that we ate the Khabt (desert bushes), so our army was called the
     Army of the Khabt. Then the sea threw a huge fish called Al-'Anbar and we ate of
     it for half a month and rubbed our bodies with its fat till our bodies became healthy.
     Then Abu Ubaida took one of its ribs and fixed it over the ground and a rider
     passed underneath it. There was a man amongst us who slaughtered three camels
     when hunger became severe, and he slaughtered three more, but after that Abu
     'Ubaida forbade him to do so. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 403: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa: 

     We participated with the Prophet in six or seven Ghazawat, and we used to eat
     locusts with him. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 404: 

     Narrated Abu Tha'laba Al-Khushani: 

     I came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are living in the land of the
     people of the Scripture, and we take our meals in their utensils, and there is game
     in that land and I hunt with my bow and with my trained hound and with my
     untrained hound." The Prophet said, "As for your saying that you are in the land of
     people of the Scripture, you should not eat in their utensils unless you find no
     alternative, in which case you must wash the utensils and then eat in them As for
     your saying that you are in the land of game, if you hunt something with your bow,
     mention Allah's Name (while hunting the game) and eat; and if you hunt something
     with your trained hound, mention Allah's Name on sending and eat; and if you hunt
     something with your untrained hound and get it alive, slaughter it and you can eat of
     it" 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 405: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Aqwa': 

     In the evening of the day of the conquest of Khaibar, the army made fires (for
     cooking). The Prophet said, "For what have you made these fires?" They said,
     "For cooking the meat of domestic donkeys." He said, "Throw away what is in the
     cooking pots and break the pots." A man from the people got up and said, "Shall
     we throw the contents of the cooking pots and then wash the pots (instead of
     breaking them)?" The Prophet said, "Yes, you can do either' 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 406: 

     Narrated Rafi bin Khadij: 

     We were with the Prophet in Dhul-Hulaifa and there the people were struck with
     severe hunger. Then we got camels and sheep as war booty (and slaughtered
     them). The Prophet was behind all the people. The people hurried and fixed the
     cooking pots (for cooking) but the Prophet came there and ordered that the
     cooking pots be turned upside down. Then he distributed the animals, regarding
     ten sheep as equal to one camel. One of the camels ran away and there were a few
     horses with the people. They chased the camel but they got tired, whereupon a
     man shot it with an arrow whereby Allah stopped it. The Prophet said, "Among
     these animals some are as wild as wild beasts, so if one of them runs away from
     you, treat it in this way." I said. "We hope, or we are afraid that tomorrow we will
     meet the enemy and we have no knives, shall we slaughter (our animals) with
     canes?" The Prophet said, "If the killing tool causes blood to gush out and if Allah's
     Name is mentioned, eat (of the slaughterer animal). But do not slaughter with a
     tooth or a nail. I am telling you why: A tooth is a bone, and the nail is the knife of
     Ethiopians." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 407: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said that he met Zaid bin 'Amr Nufail at a place near Baldah and
     this had happened before Allah's Apostle received the Divine Inspiration. Allah's
     Apostle presented a dish of meat (that had been offered to him by the pagans) to
     Zaid bin 'Amr, but Zaid refused to eat of it and then said (to the pagans), "I do not
     eat of what you slaughter on your stonealtars (Ansabs) nor do I eat except that on
     which Allah's Name has been mentioned on slaughtering." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 408: 

     Narrated Jundub bin Sufyan Al-Bajali: 

     Once during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle we offered some animals as sacrifices.
     Some people slaughtered their sacrifices before the (Id) prayer, so when the
     Prophet finished his prayer, he saw that they had slaughtered their sacrifices before
     the prayer. He said, "Whoever has slaughtered (his sacrifice) before the prayer,
     should slaughter (another sacrifice) in lieu of it; and whoever has not yet
     slaughtered it till we have prayed; should slaughter (it) by mentioning Allah's
     Name." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 409: 

     Narrated Ka'b: 

     that a slave girl of theirs used to shepherd some sheep at Si'a (a mountain near
     Medina). On seeing one of her sheep dying, she broke a stone and slaughtered it.
     Ka'b said to his family, "Do not eat (of it) till I go to the Prophet and ask him, or,
     till I send someone to ask him." So he went to the Prophet or sent someone to him
     The Prophet permitted (them) to eat it. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 410: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah 

     that Ka'b had a slave girl who used to graze his sheep on a small mountain, called
     "Sl'a", situated near the market. Once a sheep was dying, so she broke a stone and
     slaughtered it with it. When they mentioned that to the Prophet, he, permitted them
     to eat it. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 411: 

     Narrated Rafi bin Khadij: 

     that he said, "O Allah's Apostle! We have no knife." The Prophet said, "if the
     killing tool causes blood to gush out, and if Allah's Name is mentioned, eat (of the
     slaughtered animal). But do not slaughter with a nail or a tooth, for the nail is the
     knife of Ethiopians and a tooth is a bone." Suddenly a camel ran away and it was
     stopped (with an arrow). The Prophet then said, "Of these camels there are some
     which are as wild as wild beasts; so if one of them runs away from you and you
     cannot catch it, treat it in this manner (i.e. shoot it with an arrow)." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 412: 

     Narrated Ka'b bin Malik: 

     A lady slaughtered a sheep with a stone and then the Prophet was asked about it
     and he permitted it to be eaten. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 413: 

     Narrated Mu'adh bin Sad or Sad bin Mu'adh: 

     A slave girl belonging to Ka'b used to graze some sheep at Sl'a (mountain). Once
     one of her sheep was dying. She reached it (before it died) and slaughtered it with
     a stone. The Prophet was asked, and he said, "Eat it." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 414: 

     Narrated Rafi bin Khadij: 

     The Prophet said, "Eat what is slaughtered (with any instrument) that makes blood
     flow out, except what is slaughtered with a tooth or a nail.' 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 415: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     A group of people said to the Prophet, "Some people bring us meat and we do not
     know whether they have mentioned Allah's Name or not on slaughtering the
     animal." He said, "Mention Allah's Name on it and eat." Those people had
     embraced Islam recently. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 416: 

     Narrates 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal: 

     While we were besieging the castle of Khaibar, Somebody threw a skin full of fat
     and I went ahead to take it, but on looking behind, I saw the Prophet and I felt shy
     in his presence (and did not take it). 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 417: 

     Narrated Rafi bin Khadij: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are going to face the enemy tomorrow and we do
     not have knives." He said, "Hurry up (in killing the animal). If the killing tool causes
     blood to flow out, and if Allah's Name is mentioned, eat (of the slaughtered
     animal). But do not slaughter with a tooth or a nail. I will tell you why: As for the
     tooth, it is a bone; and as for the nail, it is the knife of Ethiopians." Then we got
     some camels and sheep as war booty, and one of those camels ran away,
     whereupon a man shot it with an arrow and stopped it. Allah's Apostle said, "Of
     these camels there are some which are as wild as wild beasts, so if one of them
     (runs away and) makes you tired, treat it in this manner." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 418: 

     Narrated Asma bint Abu Bakr: 

     We slaughtered a horse (by Nahr) during the lifetime of the Prophet and ate it. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 419: 

     Narrated Asma': 

     We slaughtered a horse (by Dhabh) during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle while we
     were at Medina, and we ate it. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 420: 

     Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr: 

     We slaughtered a horse (by Nahr) during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle and ate it. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 421: 

     Narrated Hisham bin Zaid: 

     Anas and I went to Al-Hakam bin Aiyub. Anas saw some boys shooting at a tied
     hen. Anas said, "The Prophet has forbidden the shooting of tied or confined
     animals." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 422: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     that he entered upon Yahya bin Said while one of Yahya's sons was aiming at a
     hen after tying it. Ibn 'Umar walked to it and untied it. Then he brought it and the
     boy and said. "Prevent your boys from tying the birds for the sake of killing them,
     as I have heard the Prophet forbidding the killing of an animal or other living thing
     after tying them." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 423: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     While I was with Ibn 'Umar, we passed by a group of young men who had tied a
     hen and started shooting at it. When they saw Ibn 'Umar, they dispersed, leaving it.
     On that Ibn 'Umar said, "Who has done this? The Prophet cursed the one who did
     so." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 424: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet cursed the one who did Muthla to an animal (i e., cut its limbs or
     some other part of its body while it is still alive). 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 425: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Yazid: 

     The Prophet forbade An-Nuhba and Al-Muthla. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 426: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari: 

     I saw the Prophet eating chicken. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 427: 

     Narrated Zahdam: 

     We were in the company of Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari and there were friendly relations
     between us and this tribe of Jarm. Abu Musa was presented with a dish containing
     chicken. Among the people there was sitting a red-faced man who did not come
     near the food. Abu Musa said (to him), "Come on (and eat), for I have seen
     Allah's Apostle eating of it (i.e. chicken)." He said, "I have seen it eating something
     (dirty) and since then I have disliked it, and have taken an oath that I shall not eat it
     ' Abu Musa said, "Come on, I will tell you (or narrate to you). Once I went to
     Allah s Apostle with a group of Al-Ash'ariyin, and met him while he was angry,
     distributing some camels of Rakat. We asked for mounts but he took an oath that
     he would not give us any mounts, and added, 'I have nothing to mount you on' In
     the meantime some camels of booty were brought to Allah's Apostle and he asked
     twice, 'Where are Al-Ash'ariyin?" So he gave us five white camels with big humps.
     We stayed for a short while (after we had covered a little distance), and then I said
     to my companions, "Allah's Apostle has forgotten his oath. By Allah, if we do not
     remind Allah's Apostle of his oath, we will never be successful." So we returned to
     the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We asked you for mounts, but you took
     an oath that you would not give us any mounts; we think that you have forgotten
     your oath.' He said, 'It is Allah Who has given you mounts. By Allah, and Allah
     willing, if I take an oath and later find something else better than that. then I do
     what is better and expiate my oath.' " 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 428: 

     Narrated Asma': 

     We slaughtered a horse during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle and ate it. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 429: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     On the Day of the battle of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle made donkey's meat unlawful
     and allowed the eating of horse flesh. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 430: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet made the meat of donkeys unlawful on the day of the battle of
     Khaibar. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 431: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet prohibited the eating of donkey's meat. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 432: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     Allah's Apostle prohibited Al-Mut'a marriage and the eating of donkey's meat in
     the year of the Khaibar battle 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 433: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet prohibited the eating of donkey's meat on the day of the battle of
     Khaibar, and allowed the eating of horse flesh. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 434: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' and Ibn Abi 'Aufa: 

     The Prophet prohibited the eating of donkey's meat. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 435: 

     Narrated Abu Tha'alba: 

     Allah's Apostle prohibited the eating of donkey's meat. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 435o: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: 

     The Prophet prohibited the eating of beasts having fangs. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 436: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Someone came to Allah's Apostle and said, "The donkeys have been (slaughtered
     and) eaten. Another man came and said, "The donkeys have been destroyed." On
     that the Prophet ordered a caller to announce to the people: Allah and His Apostle
     forbid you to eat the meat of donkeys, for it is impure.' Thus the pots were turned
     upside down while the (donkeys') meat was boiling in them. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 437: 

     Narrated 'Amr: 

     I said to Jabir bin Zaid, "The people claim that Allah's Apostle forbade the eating
     of donkey's meat." He said, "Al-Hakam bin 'Amr Al-Ghifari used to say so when
     he was with us, but Ibn 'Abbas, the great religious learned man, refused to give a
     final verdict and recited:-- 'Say: I find not in that which has been inspired to me
     anything forbidden to be eaten by one who wishes to eat it, unless it be carrion,
     blood poured forth or the flesh of swine...' (6.145) 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 438: 

     Narrated Abu Tha'laba: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the eating of the meat of beasts having fangs. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 439: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     Once Allah's Apostle passed by a dead sheep and said (to the people), "Why
     don't you use its hide?" They said, "But it is dead," He said, "Only eating it, is
     prohibited." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 440: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet passed by a dead goat and said, "There is no harm if its owners
     benefit from its skin." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 441: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "None is wounded in Allah's Cause but will come on the Day
     of Resurrection with his wound bleeding. The thing that will come out of his wound
     will be the color of blood, but its smell will be the smell of musk." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 442: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, 'The example of a good pious companion and an evil one is that
     of a person carrying musk and another blowing a pair of bellows. The one who is
     carrying musk will either give you some perfume as a present, or you will buy some
     from him, or you will get a good smell from him, but the one who is blowing a pair
     of bellows will either burn your clothes or you will get a bad smell from him." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 443: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once we provoked a rabbit at Marr-az-Zahran. The people chased it till they got
     tired. Then I caught It and brought it to Abu Talha, who slaughtered it and then
     sent both its pelvic pieces (or legs) to the Prophet, and the Prophet accepted the
     present. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 444: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "I do not eat mastigure, but I do not prohibit its eating." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 445: 

     Narrated Khalid bin Al-Walid: 

     Allah's Apostle and I entered the house of Maimuna. A roasted mastigure was
     served. Allah's Apostle stretched his hand out (to eat of it) but some woman said,
     "Inform Allah's Apostle of what he is about to eat." So they said, "It is mastigure,
     O Allah's Apostle!" He withdrew his hand, whereupon I said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     Is it unlawful?" He said, "No, but this is not found in the land of my people, so I
     dislike it." So I pulled the mastigure towards me and ate it while Allah's Apostle
     was looking at me. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 446: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     A mouse fell into the butter-fat and died. The Prophet was asked about that. He
     said, "Throw away the mouse and the butter-fat that surrounded it, and eat the rest
     of the butter-fat (As-Samn). 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 447: 

     Narrated Az-Zhuri: 

     regarding an animal, e.g., a mouse or some other animal that had fallen into solid or
     liquid oil or butter-fat: I had been informed that a mouse had died in butter-fat
     whereupon Allah's Apostle ordered that the butter-fat near it be thrown away and
     the rest of the butter-fat can be eaten. 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 448: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     The Prophet was asked about a mouse that had fallen into butter-fat (and died).
     He said, "Throw away the mouse and the portion of butter-fat around it, and eat
     the rest." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 449: 

     Narrated Salim: 

     that Ibn 'Umar disliked the branding of animals on the face. Ibn 'Umar said, "The
     Prophet forbade beating (animals) on the face." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 450: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I brought a brother of mine to the Prophet to do Tahnik for him while the Prophet
     was in a sheep fold of his, and I saw him branding a sheep. (The sub-narrator said:
     I think Anas said, branding it on the ear.) 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 451: 

     Narrated Rait' bin Khadij: 

     I said to the Prophet, "We will be facing the enemy tomorrow and we have no
     knives (for slaughtering)' He said, "If you slaughter the animal with anything that
     causes its blood to flow out, and if Allah's Name is mentioned on slaughtering it,
     eat of it, unless the killing instrument is a tooth or nail. I will tell you why: As for the
     tooth, it is a bone; and as for the nail, it is the knife of Ethiopians." The quick ones
     among the people got the war booty while the Prophet was behind the people. So
     they placed the cooking pots on the fire, but the Prophet ordered the cooking pots
     to be turned upside down. Then he distributed (the war booty) among them,
     considering one camel as equal to ten sheep. Then a camel belonging to the first
     party of people ran away and they had no horses with them, so a man shot it with
     an arrow whereby Allah stopped it. The Prophet said, "Of these animals there are
     some which are as wild as wild beasts. So, if anyone of them runs away like this,
     do like this (shoot it with an arrow)." 


Volume 7, Book 67, Number 452: 

     Narrated Rafi bin Khadij: 

     While we were with the Prophet. on a journey, one of the camels ran away. A man
     shot it with an arrow and stopped it. The Prophet said, "Of these camels some are
     as wild as wild beasts, so if one of them runs away and you cannot catch it, then
     do like this (shoot it with an arrow)." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Sometimes when
     we are in battles or on a journey we want to slaughter (animals) but we have no
     knives." He said, "Listen! If you slaughter the animal with anything that causes its
     blood to flow out, and if Allah's Name is mentioned on slaughtering it, eat of it,
     provided that the slaughtering instrument is not a tooth or a nail, as the tooth is a
     bone and the nail is the knife of Ethiopians." 

Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 68: 

      Al-Adha Festival Sacrifice (Adaahi) 



Volume 7, Book 68, Number 453: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The Prophet said (on the day of Idal-Adha), "The first thing we will do on this day
     of ours, is to offer the ('Id) prayer and then return to slaughter the sacrifice.
     Whoever does so, he acted according to our Sunna (tradition), and whoever
     slaughtered (the sacrifice) before the prayer, what he offered was just meat he
     presented to his family, and that will not be considered as Nusak (sacrifice)." (On
     hearing that) Abu Burda bin Niyar got up, for he had slaughtered the sacrifice
     before the prayer, and said, "I have got a six month old ram." The Prophet said,
     'Slaughter it (as a sacrifice) but it will not be sufficient for any-one else (as a
     sacrifice after you). Al-Bara' added: The Prophet said, "Whoever slaughtered (the
     sacrifice) after the prayer, he slaughtered it at the right time and followed the
     tradition of the Muslims." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 454: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever slaughtered the sacrifice before the prayer, he just
     slaughtered it for himself, and whoever slaughtered it after the prayer, he
     slaughtered it at the right time and followed the tradition of the Muslims." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 455: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir Al-Juhani: 

     that the Prophet distributed among his companions some animals for sacrifice (to
     be slaughtered on 'Id-al-Adha). 'Uqba's share was a Jadha'a (a six month old
     goat). 'Uqba said, "O Allah's Apostle! I get in my share of Jadha'a (a six month old
     ram)." The Prophet said, "Slaughter it as a sacrifice." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 456: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     that the Prophet entered upon her when she had her menses at Sarif before
     entering Mecca, and she was weeping (because she was afraid that she would not
     be able to perform the Hajj). The Prophet said, "What is wrong with you? Have
     you got your period?" She said, "Yes." He said, "This is a matter Allah has decreed
     for all the daughters of Adam, so perform all the ceremonies of Hajj like the others,
     but do not perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba." 'Aisha added: When we were at
     Mina, beef was brought to me and I asked, "What is this?" They (the people) said,
     "Allah's Apostle has slaughtered some cows as sacrifices on behalf of his wives." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 457: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said on the day of Nahr, "Whoever has slaughtered his sacrifice
     before the prayer, should repeat it (slaughter another sacrifice)." A man got up and
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! This is a day on which meat is desired." He then
     mentioned his neighbors saying, "I have a six month old ram which is to me better
     than the meat of two sheep." The Prophet allowed him to slaughter it as a sacrifice,
     but I do not know whether this permission was valid for other than that man or not.
     The Prophet then went towards two rams and slaughtered them, and then the
     people went towards some sheep and distributed them among themselves. 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 458: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     The Prophet said, "Time has come back to its original state which it had on the day
     Allah created the Heavens and the Earth. The year is twelve months, four of which
     are sacred, three of them are in succession, namely Dhul-Qa'da, Dhul Hijja and
     Muharram, (the fourth being) Rajab Mudar which is between Juma'da (ath-thamj
     and Sha'ban. The Prophet then asked, "Which month is this?" We said, "Allah and
     his Apostle know better." He kept silent so long that we thought that he would call
     it by a name other than its real name. He said, "Isn't it the month of Dhul-Hijja?"
     We said, "Yes." He said, "Which town is this?" We said, "Allah and His Apostle
     know better." He kept silent so long that we thought that he would call it t,y a name
     other than its real name. He said, "isn't it the town (of Mecca)?" We replied, "Yes."
     He said, "What day is today?" We replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better."
     He kept silent so long that we thought that he would call it by a name other than its
     real name. He said, "Isn't it the day of Nahr?" We replied, "Yes." He then said,
     "Your blood, properties and honor are as sacred to one another as this day of
     yours in this town of yours in this month of yours. You will meet your Lord, and He
     will ask you about your deeds. Beware! Do not go astray after me by cutting the
     necks of each other. It is incumbent upon those who are present to convey this
     message to those who are absent, for some of those to whom it is conveyed may
     comprehend it better than some of those who have heard it directly." (Muhammad,
     the sub-narrator, on mentioning this used to say: The Prophet then said, "No
     doubt! Haven't I delivered (Allah's) Message (to you)? Haven't I delivered Allah's
     message (to you)?" 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 459: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     'Abdullah (bin 'Umar) used to slaughter his sacrifice at the slaughtering place (i.e
     the slaughtering place of the Prophet ) . Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle used to
     slaughter (camels and sheep, etc.,) as sacrifices at the Musalla." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 460: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet used to offer two rams as sacrifices, and I also used to offer two
     rams. 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 461: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle came towards two horned rams having black and white colors and
     slaughtered them with his own hands. 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 462: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir: 

     that the Prophet gave him some sheep to distribute among his companions to
     slaughter as sacrifices ('Id--al--Adha). A kid was left and he told the Prophet of
     that whereupon he said to him, "Slaughter it as a sacrifice (on your behalf)." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 463: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     An uncle of mine called Abu Burda, slaughtered his sacrifice before the 'Id prayer.
     So Allah's Apostle said to him, "Your (slaughtered) sheep was just mutton (not a
     sacrifice)." Abu Burda said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have got a domestic kid." The
     Prophet said, "Slaughter it (as a sacrifice) but it will not be permissible for anybody
     other than you" The Prophet added, "Whoever slaughtered his sacrifice before the
     ('Id) prayer, he only slaughtered for himself, and whoever slaughtered it after the
     prayer, he offered his sacrifice properly and followed the tradition of the Muslims." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 464: 

     Narrated Al-Bara': 

     Abu Burda slaughtered (the sacrifice) before the ('Id) prayer whereupon the
     Prophet said to him, "Slaughter another sacrifice instead of that." Abu Burda said,
     "I have nothing except a Jadha'a." (Shu'ba said: Perhaps Abu Burda also said that
     Jadha'a was better than an old sheep in his opinion.) The Prophet said, "(Never
     mind), slaughter it to make up for the other one, but it will not be sufficient for
     anyone else after you." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 465: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet slaughtered two rams, black and white in color (as sacrifices), and I
     saw him putting his foot on their sides and mentioning Allah's Name and Takbir
     (Allahu Akbar). Then he slaughtered them with his own hands. 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 466: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle entered upon me at Sarif while I was weeping (because I was
     afraid that I would not be able to perform the ,Hajj). He said, "What is wrong with
     you? Have you got your period?" I replied, "Yes." He said, "This is a matter Allah
     has decreed for all the daughters of Adam, so perform the ceremonies of the Hajj
     as the pilgrims do, but do not perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba." Allah's
     Apostle slaughtered some cows as sacrifices on behalf of his wives. 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 467: 

     Narrated Al-Bara': 

     I heard the Prophet delivering a sermon, and he said (on the Day of 'Id-Allah. a),
     "The first thing we will do on this day of ours is that we will offer the 'Id prayer,
     then we will return and slaughter our sacrifices; and whoever does so, then indeed
     he has followed our tradition, and whoever slaughtered his sacrifice (before the
     prayer), what he offered was just meat that he presented to his family, and that was
     not a sacrifice." Abu Burda got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I slaughtered the
     sacrifice before the prayer and I have got a Jadha'a which is better than an old
     sheep." The Prophet said, "Slaughter it to make up for that, but it will not be
     sufficient for anybody else after you." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 468: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever slaughtered the sacrifice before the 'Id prayer, should
     repeat it (slaughter another one)." A man said "This is the day on which meat is
     desired." Then he mentioned the need of his neighbors (for meat) and the Prophet
     seemed to accept his excuse. The man said, "I have a Jadha'a which is to me better
     than two sheep." The Prophet allowed him (to slaughter it as a sacrifice). But I do
     not know whether this permission was general for all Muslims or not. The Prophet
     then went towards two rams and slaughtered them, and the people went towards
     their sheep and slaughtered them. 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 469: 

     Narrated Jundab bin Sufyan Al-Bajali: 

     I witnessed the Prophet on the Day of Nahr. He said, "Whoever slaughtered the
     sacrifice before offering the 'Id prayer, should slaughter another sacrifice in its
     place; and whoever has not slaughtered their sacrifice yet, should slaughter now." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 470: 

     Narrated Al-Bara': 

     One day Allah's Apostle offered the 'Id prayer and said, "Whoever offers our
     prayer and faces our Qibla should not slaughter the sacrifice till he finishes the 'Id
     prayer." Abu Burda bin Niyar got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have already
     done it. The Prophet said, "That is something you have done before its due time."
     Abu Burda said, "I have a Jadha'a which is better than two old sheep; shall I
     slaughter it?" The Prophet said, "Yes, but it will not be sufficient for anyone after
     you." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 471: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet used to offer as sacrifices, two horned rams, black and white in color,
     and used to put his foot on their sides and slaughter them with his own hands. 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 472: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet offered as sacrifices, two horned rams, black and white in color. He
     slaughtered them with his own hands and mentioned Allah's Name over them and
     said Takbir and put his foot on their sides. 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 473: 

     Narrated Masruq: 

     that he came to 'Aisha and said to her, "O Mother of the Believers! There is a man
     who sends a Hadi to Ka'ba and stays in his city and requests that his Hadi camel
     be garlanded while he remains in a state of Ihram from that day till the people finish
     their Ihram (after completing all the ceremonies of Hajj)" (What do you say about
     it?) Masruq added, I heard the clapping of her hands behind the curtain. She said,
     "I used to twist the garlands for the Hadi of Allah's Apostle and he used to send his
     Hadi to Ka'ba but he never used to regard as unlawful what was lawful for men to
     do with their wives till the people returned (from the Hajj)." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 474: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     During the lifetime of the Prophet we used to take with us the meat of the sacrifices
     (of Id al Adha) to Medina. (The narrator often said. The meat of the Hadi). 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 475: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri: 

     that once he was not present (at the time of 'Id-al-Adha) and when he came. some
     meat was presented to him. and the people said (to him), 'This is the meat of our
     sacrifices" He said. 'Take it away; I shall not taste it. (In his narration) Abu Sa'id
     added: I got up and went to my brother, Abu Qatada (who was his maternal
     brother and was one of the warriors of the battle of Badr) and mentioned that to
     him He Sad. 'A new verdict was given in your absence (i.e., meat of sacrifices was
     allowed to be stored and eaten later on)." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 476: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Aqua': 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever has slaughtered a sacrifice should not keep anything
     of Its meat after three days." When it was the next year the people said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Shall we do as we did last year?" He said, ' Eat of it and feed of it to
     others and store of it for in that year the people were having a hard time and I
     wanted you to help (the needy)." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 477: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We used to salt some of the meat of sacrifice and present it to the Prophet at
     Medina. Once he said, "Do not eat (of that meat) for more than three days." That
     was not a final order, but (that year) he wanted us to feed of it to others, Allah
     knows better. 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 478: 

     Narrated Abu 'Ubaid: 

     the freed slave of Ibn Azhar that he witnessed the Day of 'Id-al-Adha with 'Umar
     bin Al-Khattab. 'Umar offered the 'Id prayer before the sermon and then delivered
     the sermon before the people, saying, "O people! Allah's Apostle has forbidden
     you to fast (on the first day of) each of these two 'Ida, for one of them is the Day
     of breaking your fast, and the other is the one, on which you eat the meat of your
     sacrifices." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 479: 

     Narrated Abu 'Ubaid: 

     (in continuation of 478). Then I witnessed the 'Id with 'Uthman bin 'Affan, and that
     was on a Friday. He offered the prayer before the sermon, saying, "O people!
     Today you have two 'Its (festivals) together, so whoever of those who live at
     Al-'Awali (suburbs) would like to wait for the Jumua prayer, he may wait, and
     whoever would like to return (home) Is granted my permission to do so." Then I
     witnessed (the 'Its) with 'Ali bin Abi Talib, and he too offered the 'Id prayer before
     the sermon and then delivered the sermon before the people and said, "Allah's
     Apostle has forbidden you to eat the meat of your sacrifices for more than three
     days." 


Volume 7, Book 68, Number 480: 

     Narrated Salim: 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said, "Eat of the meat of sacrifices (of
     'Id al Adha) for three days." When 'Abdullah departed from Mina, he used to eat
     (bread with) oil, lest he should eat of the meat of Hadi (which is regarded as
     unlawful after the three days of the 'Id). 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 69: 

                              Drinks 



Volume 7, Book 69, Number 481: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever drinks alcoholic drinks in the world and does not
     repent (before dying), will be deprived of it in the Hereafter." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 482: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     On the night Allah's Apostle was taken on a night journey (Miraj) two cups, one
     containing wine and the other milk, were presented to him at Jerusalem. He looked
     at it and took the cup of milk. Gabriel said, "Praise be to Allah Who guided you to
     Al-Fitra (the right path); if you had taken (the cup of) wine, your nation would have
     gone astray." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 483: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I heard from Allah's Apostle a narration which none other than I will narrate to
     you. The Prophet, said, "From among the portents of the Hour are the following:
     General ignorance (in religious affairs) will prevail, (religious) knowledge will
     decrease, illegal sexual intercourse will prevail, alcoholic drinks will be drunk (in
     abundance), men will decrease and women will increase so much so that for every
     fifty women there will be one man to look after them." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 484: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "An adulterer, at the time he is committing illegal sexual
     intercourse is not a believer; and a person, at the time of drinking an alcoholic drink
     is not a believer; and a thief, at the time of stealing, is not a believer." Ibn Shihab
     said: 'Abdul Malik bin Abi Bakr bin 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al- Harith bin Hisham
     told me that Abu Bakr used to narrate that narration to him on the authority of Abu
     Huraira. He used to add that Abu Bakr used to mention, besides the above cases,
     "And he who robs (takes illegally something by force) while the people are looking
     at him, is not a believer at the time he is robbing (taking) 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 485: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     "Alcoholic drinks were prohibited (by Allah) when there was nothing of it (special
     kind of wine) in Medina. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 486: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     "Alcoholic drinks were prohibited at the time we could rarely find wine made from
     grapes in Medina, for most of our liquors were made from unripe and ripe dates. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 487: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     'Umar stood up on the pulpit and said, "Now then, prohibition of alcoholic drinks
     have been revealed, and these drinks are prepared from five things, i.e.. grapes,
     dates, honey, wheat or barley And an alcoholic drink is that, that disturbs the mind.


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 488: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     I was serving Abu 'Ubaida, Abu Talha and Ubai bin Ka'b with a drink prepared
     from ripe and unripe dates. Then somebody came to them and said, "Alcoholic
     drinks have been prohibited." (On hearing that) Abu Talha said, "Get up. O Anas,
     and pour (throw) it out! So I poured (threw) it out. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 489: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     While I was waiting on my uncles and serving them with (wine prepared from)
     dates----and I was the youngest of them----it was said, "Alcoholic drinks have
     been prohibited." So they said (to me), "Throw it away." So I threw it away. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 490: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Alcoholic drinks were prohibited. At that time these drinks used to be prepared
     from unripe and ripe dates. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 491: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle was asked about Al-Bit. He said, "All drinks that intoxicate are
     unlawful (to drink.) 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 492a: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle was asked about Al-Bit a liquor prepared from honey which the
     Yemenites used to drink. Allah's Apostle said, "All drinks that intoxicate are
     unlawful (to drink)." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 492b: 

     Anas bin Malik said: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Do not make drinks in Ad-Dubba' nor in Al-Muzaffat. Abu
     Huraira used to add to them Al-Hantam and An-Naqir. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 493: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     'Umar delivered a sermon on the pulpit of Allah's Apostle, saying, "Alcoholic
     drinks were prohibited by Divine Order, and these drinks used to be prepared
     from five things, i.e., grapes, dates, wheat, barley and honey. Alcoholic drink is
     that, that disturbs the mind." 'Umar added, "I wish Allah's Apostle had not left us
     before he had given us definite verdicts concerning three matters, i.e., how much a
     grandfather may inherit (of his grandson), the inheritance of Al-Kalala (the
     deceased person among whose heirs there is no father or son), and various types
     of Riba(1 ) (usury) ." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 494s: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     "Alcoholic drinks are prepared from five things, i.e., raisins, dates. wheat, barley
     and honey." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 494v: 

     Narrated Abu 'Amir or Abu Malik Al-Ash'ari: 

     that he heard the Prophet saying, "From among my followers there will be some
     people who will consider illegal sexual intercourse, the wearing of silk, the drinking
     of alcoholic drinks and the use of musical instruments, as lawful. And there will be
     some people who will stay near the side of a mountain and in the evening their
     shepherd will come to them with their sheep and ask them for something, but they
     will say to him, 'Return to us tomorrow.' Allah will destroy them during the night
     and will let the mountain fall on them, and He will transform the rest of them into
     monkeys and pigs and they will remain so till the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 495: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     Abu Usaid As-Sa'idi came and invited Allah's Apostle on the occasion of his
     wedding. His wife who was the bride, was serving them. Do you know what drink
     she prepared for Allah's Apostle ? She had soaked some dates in water in a Tur
     overnight. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 496: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the use of (certain) containers, but the Ansar said, "We
     cannot dispense with them." The Prophet then said, "If so, then use them." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 497: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     When the Prophet forbade the use of certain containers (that were used for
     preparing alcoholic drinks), somebody said to the Prophet . "But not all the people
     can find skins." So he allowed them to use clay jars not covered with pitch. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 498: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     the Prophet forbade the use of Ad-Dubba' and Al Muzaffat. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 499: 

     Narrated Al-A'mash: 

     (As above, 494). 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 500: 

     Narrated Ibrahim: 

     I asked Al-Aswad, "Did you ask 'Aisha, Mother of the Believers, about the
     containers in which it is disliked to prepare (non-alcoholic) drinks?" He said, "Yes,
     I said to her, 'O Mother of the Believers! What containers did the Prophet forbid
     to use for preparing (non-alcoholic) drinks?" She said, 'The Prophet forbade us,
     (his family), to prepare (nonalcoholic) drinks in Ad-Dubba and Al-Muzaffat.' I
     asked, 'Didn't you mention Al Jar and Al Hantam?' She said, 'I tell what I have
     heard; shall I tell you what I have not heard?' " 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 501: 

     Narrated Ash-Shaibani: 

     I heard 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa saying, "The Prophet forbade the use of green
     jars." I said, "Shall we drink out of white jars?" He said, "No." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 502: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad 

     Abu Usaid As Sa'idi invited the Prophet to his wedding banquet. At that time his
     wife was serving them and she was the bride. She said, ''Do you know what (kind
     of syrup) I soaked (made) for Allah's Apostle? I soaked some dates in water in a
     Tur (bowl) overnight. ' 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 503: 

     Narrated Abu Al-Juwairiyya: 

     I asked Ibn 'Abbas about Al-Badhaq. He said, "Muhammad prohibited alcoholic
     drinks before It was called Al-Badhaq (by saying), 'Any drink that intoxicates is
     unlawful.' I said, 'What about good lawful drinks?' He said,'Apart from what is
     lawful and good, all other things are unlawful and not good (unclean Al-Khabith). 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 504: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to like sweet edible things and honey. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 505: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     While I was serving Abu Talha. Abu Dujana and Abu Suhail bin Al-Baida' with a
     drink made from a mixture of unripe and ripe dates, alcoholic drinks, were made
     unlawful, whereupon I threw it away, and I was their butler and the youngest of
     them, and we used to consider that drink as an alcoholic drink in those days 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 506: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet forbade the drinking of alcoholic drinks prepared from raisins, dates,
     unripe dates and fresh ripe dates. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 507: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     The Prophet forbade the mixing of ripe and unripe dates and also the mixing of
     dates and raisins (for preparing a syrup) but the syrup of each kind of fruit should
     be prepared separately. ( One may have such drinks as long as it is fresh ) 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 508: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle was presented a bowl of milk and a bowl of wine on the night he
     was taken on a journey (Al-Mi'raj). 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 509: 

     Narrated Um Al-Fadl: 

     The people doubted whether Allah's Apostle was fasting or the Day of 'Arafat or
     not. So I sent a cup containing milk to him and he drank it. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 510: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Abu Humaid brought a cup of mix from a place called Al-Naqi. Allah's Apostle
     said to him, "Will you not cover it, even by placing a stick across its" 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 511: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Abu Humaid, an Ansari man, came from AnNaqi carrying a cup of milk to the
     Prophet. The Prophet said, "Will you not cover it even by placing a stick across
     it?" 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 512: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The Prophet came from Mecca with Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr said "We passed by a
     shepherd and at that time Allah's Apostle was thirsty. I milked a little milk in a bowl
     and Allah's Apostle drank till I was pleased. Suraqa bin Ju'shum came to us riding
     a horse (chasing us). The Prophet invoked evil upon him, whereupon Suraqa
     requested him not to invoke evil upon him, in which case he would go back. The
     Prophet agreed. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 513: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The best object of charity is a she-camel which has (newly)
     given birth and gives plenty of milk, or a she-goat which gives plenty of milk; and is
     given to somebody to utilize its milk by milking one bowl in the morning and one in
     the evening." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 514: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: Allah's Apostle drank milk and then rinsed his mouth and
     said, "It contains fat. The Prophet added: I was raised to the Lote Tree and saw
     four rivers, two of which were coming out and two going in. Those which were
     coming out were the Nile and the Euphrates, and those which were going in were
     two rivers in paradise. Then I was given three bowls, one containing milk, and
     another containing honey, and a third containing wine. I took the bowl containing
     milk and drank it. It was said to me, "You and your followers will be on the right
     path (of Islam)." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 515: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Abu Talha had the largest number of datepalms from amongst the Ansars of
     Medina. The dearest of his property to him was Bairuha garden which was facing
     the (Prophet's) Mosque. Allah's Apostle used to enter it and drink of its good fresh
     water. When the Holy Verse:-- 'By no means shall you attain righteousness unless
     you spend (in charity) of that which you love.' (3.92) was revealed, Abu Talha got
     up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Allah says: By no means shall you attain
     righteousness unless you spend of that which you love,' and the dearest of my
     property to me is the Bairuha garden and I want to give it in charity in Allah's
     Cause, seeking to be rewarded by Allah for that. So you can spend it, O Allah's
     Apostle, where-ever Allah instructs you. ' Allah s Apostle said, "Good! That is a
     perishable (or profitable) wealth" ('Abdullah is in doubt as to which word was
     used.) He said, "I have heard what you have said but in my opinion you'd better
     give it to your kith and kin." On that Abu Talha said, "I will do so, O Allah's
     Apostle!" Abu Talha distributed that garden among his kith and kin and cousins. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 516: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle drinking milk. He came to my house and I milked a sheep
     and then mixed the milk with water from the well for Allah's Apostle. He took the
     bowl and drank while on his left there was sitting Abu Bakr, and on his right there
     was a bedouin. He then gave the remaining milk to the bedouin and said, "The
     right! The right (first)." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 517: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle and one of his companions entered upon an Ansari man and the
     Prophet said to him, "If you have water kept overnight in a water skin, (give us),
     otherwise we will drink water by putting our mouth in it." The man was watering his
     garden then. He said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have water kept overnight; let us go to
     the shade." So he took them both there and poured water into a bowl and milked a
     domestic goat of his in it. Allah's Apostle drank, and then the man who had come
     along with him, drank. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 518: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to like sweet edible things (syrup, etc.) and honey. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 519: 

     Narrated An-Nazzal: 

     All came to the gate of the courtyard (of the Mosque) and drank (water) while he
     was standing and said, "Some people dislike to drink while standing, but I saw the
     Prophet doing (drinking water) as you have seen me doing now." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 520: 

     Narrated An-Nazzal bin Sabra: 

     'Ali offered the Zuhr prayer and then sat down in the wide courtyard (of the
     Mosque) of Kufa in order to deal with the affairs of the people till the 'Asr prayer
     became due. Then water was brought to him and he drank of it, washed his face,
     hands, head and feet. Then he stood up and drank the remaining water while he
     was standing. and said, "Some people dislike to drink water while standing thought
     the Prophet did as I have just done." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 521: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet drank Zam-Zam (water) while standing. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 522: 

     Narrated Um Al-Fadl: 

     (daughter of Al-Harith) that she sent a bowl of milk to the Prophet while he was
     standing (at 'Arafat) in the afternoon of the Day of 'Arafat. He took it in his hands
     and drank it. Narrated Abu Nadr: The Prophet was on the back of his camel. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 523: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Milk mixed with water was brought to Allah's Apostle while a bedouin was on his
     right and Abu Bakr was on his left. He drank (of it) and then gave (it) to the
     bedouin and said, 'The right" "The right (first)." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 524: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     Allah's Apostle was offered something to drink. He drank of it while on his right
     was a boy and on his left were some elderly people. He said to the boy, "May I
     give these (elderly) people first?" The boy said, "By Allah, O Allah's Apostle! I will
     not give up my share from you to somebody else." On that Allah's Apostle placed
     the cup in the hand of that boy. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 525: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet and one of his companions entered upon an Ansari man. The Prophet
     and his companion greeted (the man) and he replied, "O Allah's Apostle! Let my
     father and mother be sacrificed for you! It is hot," while he was watering his
     garden. The Prophet asked him, "If you have water kept overnight in a water skin,
     (give us), or else we will drink by putting our mouths in the basin." The man was
     watering the garden The man said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have water kept overnight
     in a water-skin. He went to the shade and poured some water into a bowl and
     milked some milk from a domestic goat in it. The Prophet drank and then gave the
     bowl to the man who had come along with him to drink. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 526: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I was waiting on my uncles, serving them with an alcoholic drink prepared from
     dates, and I was the youngest of them. (Suddenly) it was said that alcoholic drinks
     had been prohibited. So they said (to me), 'Throw it away." And I threw it away
     The sub-narrator said: I asked Anas what their drink was (made from), He replied,
     "(From) ripe dates and unripe dates." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 527: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When night falls (or when it is evening), stop your children
     from going out, for the devils spread out at that time. But when an hour of the night
     has passed, release them and close the doors and mention Allah's Name, for Satan
     does not open a closed door. Tie the mouth of your water-skin and mention
     Allah's Name; cover your containers and utensils and mention Allah's Name.
     Cover them even by placing something across it, and extinguish your lamps. " 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 528: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Extinguish the lamps when you go to bed; close your doors;
     tie the mouths of your water skins, and cover the food and drinks." I think he
     added, ". . . even with a stick you place across the container." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 529: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the bending of the mouths of water skins for the sake of
     drinking from them 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 530: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle forbidding the drinking of water by bending the mouths of
     water skins, i.e., drinking from the mouths directly. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 531: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade drinking directly from the mouth of a water skin or other
     leather containers. and forbade preventing one's neighbor from fixing a peg in (the
     wall of) one's house. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 532: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet forbade the drinking of water directly from the mouth of a water skin .


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 533: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet forbade the drinking of water direct from the mouth of a water-skin. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 534: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When you drink (water), do not breath in the vessel; and
     when you urinate, do not touch your penis with your right hand. And when you
     cleanse yourself after defecation, do not use your right hand." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 535: 

     Narrated Thumama bin Abdullah: 

     Anas used to breathe twice or thrice in the vessel (while drinking) and used to say
     that the Prophet; used to take three breaths while drinking. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 536: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Laila: 

     While Hudhaita was at Mada'in, he asked for water. The chief of the village
     brought him a silver vessel. Hudhaifa threw it away and said, "I have thrown it
     away because I told him not to use it, but he has not stopped using it. The Prophet
     forbade us to wear clothes of silk or Dibaj, and to drink in gold or silver utensils,
     and said, 'These things are for them (unbelievers) in this world and for you
     (Muslims) in the Hereafter.' " 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 537: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     The Prophet said, "Do not drink in gold or silver utensils, and do not wear clothes
     of silk or Dibaj, for these things are for them (unbelievers) in this world and for you
     in the Hereafter." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 538: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle said, "He who drinks in silver utensils is
     only filling his abdomen with Hell Fire." 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 539: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     Allah's Apostle ordered us to do seven things and forbade us from seven. He
     ordered us to visit the sick, to follow funeral processions, (to say) to a sneezer,
     (May Allah bestow His Mercy on you, if he says, Praise be to Allah), to accept
     invitations, to greet (everybody), to help the oppressed and to help others to fulfill
     their oaths. He forbade us to wear gold rings, to drink in silver (utensils), to use
     Mayathir (silken carpets placed on saddles), to wear Al-Qissi (a kind of silken
     cloth), to wear silk, Dibaj or Istabraq (two kinds of silk). 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 540: 

     Narrated Um Al-Fadl: 

     that the people were in doubt whether the Prophet was fasting on the Day of
     'Arafat or not, so a (wooden) drinking vessel full of milk was sent to him, and he
     drank it. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 541: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     An Arab lady was mentioned to the Prophet so he asked Abu Usaid As-Sa'idi to
     send for her, and he sent for her and she came and stayed in the castle of Bani
     Sa'ida. The Prophet came out and went to her and entered upon her. Behold, it
     was a lady sitting with a drooping head. When the Prophet spoke to her, she said,
     "I seek refuge with Allah from you." He said, "I grant you refuge from me." They
     said to her, "Do you know who this is?" She said, "No." They said, "This is Allah's
     Apostle who has come to command your hand in marriage." She said, "I am very
     unlucky to lose this chance." Then the Prophet and his companions went towards
     the shed of Bani Sa'ida and sat there. Then he said, "Give us water, O Sahl!" So I
     took out this drinking bowl and gave them water in it. The sub-narrator added:
     Sahl took out for us that very drinking bowl and we all drank from it. Later on
     Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz requested Sahl to give it to him as a present, and he gave it
     to him as a present. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 542: 

     Narrated 'Asim al-Ahwal: 

     I saw the drinking bowl of the Prophet with Anas bin Malik, and it had been
     broken, and he had mended it with silver plates. That drinking bowl was quite wide
     and made of Nadar wood, Anas said, "I gave water to the Prophet in that bowl
     more than so-and-so (for a long period)." Ibn Sirin said: Around that bowl there
     was an iron ring, and Anas wanted to replace it with a silver or gold ring, but Abu
     Talha said to him, "Do not change a thing that Allah's Apostle has made." So Anas
     left it as it was. 


Volume 7, Book 69, Number 543: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     I was with the Prophet and the time for the 'Asr prayer became due. We had no
     water with us except a little which was put in a vessel and was brought to the
     Prophet . He put his hand into it and spread out his fingers and then said, "Come
     along! Hurry up! All those who want to perform ablution. The blessing is from
     Allah.'' I saw the water gushing out from his fingers. So the people performed the
     ablution and drank, and I tried to drink more of that water (beyond my thirst and
     capacity), for I knew that it was a blessing. The sub-narrator said: I asked Jabir,
     "How many persons were you then?" He replied, "We were one-thousand four
     hundred men." Salim said: Jabir said, 1500. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 70: 

                             Patients 



Volume 7, Book 70, Number 544: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle said, "No calamity befalls a Muslim but
     that Allah expiates some of his sins because of it, even though it were the prick he
     receives from a thorn." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 545: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri and Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "No fatigue, nor disease, nor sorrow, nor sadness, nor hurt, nor
     distress befalls a Muslim, even if it were the prick he receives from a thorn, but that
     Allah expiates some of his sins for that." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 546: 

     Narrated Kab: 

     The Prophet said, "The example of a believer is that of a fresh tender plant, which
     the wind bends lt sometimes and some other time it makes it straight. And the
     example of a hypocrite is that of a pine tree which keeps straight till once it is
     uprooted suddenly. 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 547: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The example of a believer is that of a fresh tender plant; from
     whatever direction the wind comes, it bends it, but when the wind becomes quiet,
     it becomes straight again. Similarly, a believer is afflicted with calamities (but he
     remains patient till Allah removes his difficulties.) And an impious wicked person is
     like a pine tree which keeps hard and straight till Allah cuts (breaks) it down when
     He wishes." (See Hadith No. 558, Vol. 9.) 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 548: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If Allah wants to do good to somebody, He afflicts him with
     trials." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 549: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     I never saw anybody suffering so much from sickness as Allah's Apostle 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 550: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     I visited the Prophet during his ailments and he was suffering from a high fever. I
     said, "You have a high fever. Is it because you will have a double reward for it?"
     He said, "Yes, for no Muslim is afflicted with any harm but that Allah will remove
     his sins as the leaves of a tree fall down." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 551: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     I visited Allah's Apostle while he was suffering from a high fever. I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! You have a high fever." He said, "Yes, I have as much fever as two men
     of you." I said, "Is it because you will have a double reward?" He said, "Yes, it is
     so. No Muslim is afflicted with any harm, even if it were the prick of a thorn, but
     that Allah expiates his sins because of that, as a tree sheds its leaves." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 552: 

     Narrated Abu Muisa Al-Ash'ari: 

     The Prophet said, "Feed the hungry, visit the sick, and set free the captives." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 553: 

     Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib: 

     Allah's Apostle ordered us to do seven things and forbade us to do seven other
     things. He forbade us to wear gold rings, silk, Dibaj, Istabriq, Qissy, and Maithara;
     and ordered us to accompany funeral processions, visit the sick and greet
     everybody. (See Hadith No. 104) 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 554: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Once I fell ill. The Prophet and Abu Bakr came walking to pay me a visit and
     found me unconscious. The Prophet performed ablution and then poured the
     remaining water on me, and I came to my senses to see the Prophet. I said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! What shall I do with my property? How shall I dispose of
     (distribute) my property?" He did not reply till the Verse of inheritance was
     revealed. 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 555: 

     Narrated 'Ata bin Abi Rabah: 

     Ibn 'Abbas said to me, "Shall I show you a woman of the people of Paradise?" I
     said, "Yes." He said, "This black lady came to the Prophet and said, 'I get attacks
     of epilepsy and my body becomes uncovered; please invoke Allah for me.' The
     Prophet said (to her), 'If you wish, be patient and you will have (enter) Paradise;
     and if you wish, I will invoke Allah to cure you.' She said, 'I will remain patient,'
     and added, 'but I become uncovered, so please invoke Allah for me that I may not
     become uncovered.' So he invoked Allah for her." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 556: 

     Narrated 'Ata: 

     That he had seen Um Zafar, the tall black lady, at (holding) the curtain of the
     Ka'ba. 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 557: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Allah said, 'If I deprive my slave of his two
     beloved things (i.e., his eyes) and he remains patient, I will let him enter Paradise in
     compensation for them.'" 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 558: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When Allah's Apostle emigrated to Medina, Abu Bakr and Bilal got a fever. I
     entered upon them and asked, "O my father! How are you? O Bilal! How are
     you?" Whenever fever attacked Abu Bakr, he would recite the following poetic
     verses: 'Everybody is staying alive among his people, yet death is nearer to him
     than his shoe laces." And whenever the fever deserted Bilal, he would recite (two
     poetic lines): 'Would that I could stay overnight in a valley wherein I would be
     surrounded by Idhkhir and Jalil (two kinds of good smelling grass). Would that one
     day I would drink of the water of Majinna and would that Shama and Tafil (two
     mountains at Mecca) would appear to me.' Then I came and informed Allah's
     Apostle about that, whereupon he said, "O Allah! Make us love Medina as much
     or more than we love Mecca. O Allah! Make it healthy and bless its Mudd and Sa
     for us, and take away its fever and put it in Al'Juhfa." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 559: 

     Narrated Abu 'Uthman: 

     Usama bin Zaid said that while he. Sad and Ubai bin Ka'b were with the Prophet a
     daughter of the Prophet sent a message to him, saying. 'My daughter is dying;
     please come to us." The Prophet sent her his greetings and added "It is for Allah
     what He takes, and what He gives; and everything before His sight has a limited
     period. So she should hope for Allah's reward and remain patient." She again sent
     a message, beseeching him by Allah, to come. So the Prophet got up. and so did
     we (and went there). The child was placed on his lap while his breath was
     irregular. Tears flowed from the eyes of the Prophet. Sad said to him, "What is
     this, O Allah's Apostle?" He said. "This Is Mercy which Allah has embedded in the
     hearts of whomever He wished of His slaves. And Allah does not bestow His
     Mercy, except on the merciful among His slaves. (See Hadith No. 373 Vol. 2) 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 560: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet went to visit a sick bedouin. Whenever the Prophet went to a patient,
     he used to say to him, "Don't worry, if Allah will, it will be expiation (for your
     sins):" The bedouin said, "You say expiation? No, it is but a fever that is boiling or
     harassing an old man and will lead him to his grave without his will." The Prophet
     said, "Then, yes, it is so." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 561: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     A Jewish boy used to serve the Prophet and became ill. The Prophet went to pay
     him a visit and said to him, "Embrace Islam," and he did embrace Islam.
     Al-Musaiyab said: When Abu Talib was on his deathbed, the Prophet visited him. 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 562: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     During the ailment of the Prophet some people came to visits him. He led them in
     prayer while sitting. but they prayed standing, so he waved to them to sit down.
     When he had finished the prayer, he said, "An Imam is to be followed, so when he
     bows, you should bow. and when he raises his head, you should raise yours, and if
     he prays sitting. you should pray sitting." Abu Abdullah said Al-Humaidi said, (The
     order of ) "This narration has been abrogated by the last action of the Prophet as
     he led the prayer sitting, while the people prayed standing behind him' 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 563: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     I became seriously ill at Mecca and the Prophet came to visit me. I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I shall leave behind me a good fortune, but my heir is my only daughter;
     shall I bequeath two third of my property to be spent in charity and leave one third
     (for my heir)?" He said, "No." I said, "Shall I bequeath half and leave half?" He
     said, "No." I said, "Shall I bequeath one third and leave two thirds?" He said, "One
     third is alright, though even one third is too much." Then he placed his hand on his
     forehead and passed it over my face and abdomen and said, "O Allah! Cure Sad
     and complete his emigration." I feel as if I have been feeling the coldness of his
     hand on my liver ever since. 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 564: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud: 

     I visited Allah's Apostle while he was suffering from a high fever. I touched him
     with my hand and said, "O Allah's Apostle! You have a high fever." Allah's Apostle
     said, "Yes, I have as much fever as two men of you have." I said, "Is it because
     you will get a double reward?" Allah's Apostle said, "Yes, no Muslim is afflicted
     with harm because of sickness or some other inconvenience, but that Allah will
     remove his sins for him as a tree sheds its leaves." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 565: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     I visited the Prophet during his illness and touched him while he was having a fever.
     I said to him, "You have a high fever; is it because you will get a double reward?"
     He said, "Yes. No Muslim is afflicted with any harm, but that his sins will be
     annulled as the leave of a tree fall down." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 566: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle entered upon sick man to pay him a visit, and said to him, "Don't
     worry, Allah willing, (your sickness will be) an expiation for your sins." The man
     said, "No, it is but a fever that is boiling within an old man and will send him to his
     grave." On that, the Prophet said, "Then yes, it is so." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 567: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     The Prophet rode a donkey having a saddle with a Fadakiyya velvet covering. He
     mounted me behind him and went to visit Sad bin 'Ubada, and that had been
     before the battle of Badr. The Prophet proceeded till he passed by a gathering in
     which 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul was present, and that had been before
     'Abdullah embraced Islam. The gathering comprised of Muslims, polytheists, i.e.,
     isolators and Jews. 'Abdullah bin Rawaha was also present in that gathering. When
     dust raised by the donkey covered the gathering, 'Abdullah bin Ubai covered his
     nose with his upper garment and said, "Do not trouble us with dust." The Prophet
     greeted them, stopped and dismounted. Then he invited them to Allah (i.e., to
     embrace Islam) and recited to them some verses of the Holy Qur'an. On that,
     'Abdullah bin Ubai said, "O man ! There is nothing better than what you say if it is
     true. Do not trouble us with it in our gathering, but return to your house, and if
     somebody comes to you, teach him there." On that 'Abdullah bin Rawaha said,
     Yes, O Allah's Apostle! Bring your teachings to our gathering, for we love that."
     So the Muslims, the pagans and the Jews started abusing each other till they were
     about to fight. The Prophet kept on quietening them till they became calm.
     Thereupon the Prophet mounted his animal and proceeded till he entered upon Sad
     bin Ubada. He said to him "O Sad! Have you not heard what Abu Hubab (i.e.,
     'Abdullah bin Ubai) said?" Sad said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Excuse and forgive him,
     for Allah has given you what He has given you. The people of this town (Medina
     decided unanimously to crown him and make him their chief by placing a turban on
     his head, but when that was prevented by the Truth which Allah had given you he
     ('Abdullah bin Ubai) was grieved out of jealously, and that was the reason which
     caused him to behave in the way you have seen." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 568: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet came to visit me (while I was sick) and he was riding neither a mule,
     nor a horse. 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 569: 

     Narrated Ka'b bin 'Ujara: 

     The Prophet passed by me while I was kindling a fire under a (cooking) pot. He
     said, "Do the lice of your head trouble you?" I said, "Yes." So he called a barber to
     shave my head and ordered me to make expiation for that." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 570: 

     Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad: 

     'Aisha, (complaining of headache) said, "Oh, my head"! Allah's Apostle said, "I
     wish that had happened while I was still living, for then I would ask Allah's
     Forgiveness for you and invoke Allah for you." Aisha said, "Wa thuklayah! By
     Allah, I think you want me to die; and If this should happen, you would spend the
     last part of the day sleeping with one of your wives!" The Prophet said, "Nay, I
     should say, 'Oh my head!' I felt like sending for Abu Bakr and his son, and appoint
     him as my successor lest some people claimed something or some others wished
     something, but then I said (to myself), 'Allah would not allow it to be otherwise,
     and the Muslims would prevent it to be otherwise". 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 571: 

     Narrated Ibn Mas'ud: 

     I visited the Prophet while he was having a high fever. I touched him an said, "You
     have a very high fever" He said, "Yes, as much fever as two me of you may have."
     I said. "you will have a double reward?" He said, "Yes No Muslim is afflicted with
     hurt caused by disease or some other inconvenience, but that Allah will remove his
     sins as a tree sheds its leaves." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 572: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     Allah's Apostle came to visit me during my ailment which had been aggravated
     during Hajjat-al-Wada'. I said to him, "You see how sick I am. I have much
     property but have no heir except my only daughter May I give two thirds of my
     property in charity?"! He said, "No." I said, "Half of it?" He said, "No." I said "One
     third?" He said, "One third is too much, for to leave your heirs rich is better than to
     leave them poor, begging of others. Nothing you spend seeking Allah's pleasure
     but you shall get a reward for it, even for what you put in the mouth of your wife." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 573: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     When Allah's Apostle was on his death-bed and in the house there were some
     people among whom was 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, the Prophet said, "Come, let me
     write for you a statement after which you will not go astray." 'Umar said, "The
     Prophet is seriously ill and you have the Qur'an; so the Book of Allah is enough for
     us." The people present in the house differed and quarrelled. Some said "Go near
     so that the Prophet may write for you a statement after which you will not go
     astray," while the others said as Umar said. When they caused a hue and cry
     before the Prophet, Allah's Apostle said, "Go away!" Narrated 'Ubaidullah: Ibn
     'Abbas used to say, "It was very unfortunate that Allah's Apostle was prevented
     from writing that statement for them because of their disagreement and noise." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 574: 

     Narrated As-Sa'ib: 

     My aunt took me to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! My nephew is-
     ill." The Prophet touched my head with his hand and invoked Allah to bless me. He
     then performed ablution and I drank of the remaining water of his ablution and then
     stood behind his back and saw "Khatam An-Nubuwwa" (The Seal of
     Prophethood) between his shoulders like a button of a tent. 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 575: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "None of you should wish for death because of a calamity
     befalling him; but if he has to wish for death, he should say: "O Allah! Keep me
     alive as long as life is better for me, and let me die if death is better for me.' " 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 576: 

     Narrated Qais bin Abi Hazim: 

     We went to pay a visit to Khabbab (who was sick) and he had been branded
     (cauterized) at seven places in his body. He said, "Our companions who died
     (during the lifetime of the Prophet) left (this world) without having their rewards
     reduced through enjoying the pleasures of this life, but we have got (so much)
     wealth that we find no way to spend It except on the construction of buildings Had
     the Prophet not forbidden us to wish for death, I would have wished for it.' We
     visited him for the second time while he was building a wall. He said, A Muslim is
     rewarded (in the Hereafter) for whatever he spends except for something that he
     spends on building." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 577: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The good deeds of any person will not make him
     enter Paradise." (i.e., None can enter Paradise through his good deeds.) They (the
     Prophet's companions) said, 'Not even you, O Allah's Apostle?' He said, "Not
     even myself, unless Allah bestows His favor and mercy on me." So be moderate in
     your religious deeds and do the deeds that are within your ability: and none of you
     should wish for death, for if he is a good doer, he may increase his good deeds,
     and if he is an evil doer, he may repent to Allah." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 578: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I heard the Prophet , who was resting against me, saying, "O Allah! Excuse me and
     bestow Your Mercy on me and let me join with the highest companions (in
     Paradise)." See Qur'an (4.69) 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 579: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle paid a visit to a patient, or a patient was brought to him,
     he used to invoke Allah, saying, "Take away the disease, O the Lord of the
     people! Cure him as You are the One Who cures. There is no cure but Yours, a
     cure that leaves no disease." 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 580: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     The Prophet came to me while I was ill. He performed ablution and threw the
     remaining water on me (or said, "Pour it on him) " When I came to my senses I
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have no son or father to be my heir, so how will be my
     inheritance?" Then the Verse of inheritance was revealed. 


Volume 7, Book 70, Number 581: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When Allah's Apostle emigrated to Medina, Abu Bakr and Bilal had a fever. I
     entered upon them and said, "O my father! How are you? O Bilal! How are you?"
     Whenever Abu Bakr got the fever he used to say, "Everybody is staying alive with
     his people, yet death is nearer to him than his shoe laces." And when fever
     deserted Bilal, he would recite (two poetic verses): "Would that I could stay
     overnight in a valley wherein I would be surrounded by Idhkhir and Jalil (two kinds
     of good smelling grass). Would that one day I could drink of the water of Majinna,
     and would that Shama and Tafil (two mountains at Mecca) would appear to me!" I
     went to Allah's Apostle and informed him about that. He said, "O Allah! Make us
     love Medina as much or more than we love Mecca, and make it healthy, and bless
     its Sa and its Mudd, and take away its fever and put it in Al-Juhfa." (See Hadith
     No 558) . 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 71: 

                            Medicine 



Volume 7, Book 71, Number 582: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "There is no disease that Allah has created, except that He also
     has created its treatment." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 583: 

     Narrated Rubai bint Mu'adh bin Afra: 

     We used to go for Military expeditions along with Allah's Apostle and provide the
     people with water, serve them and bring the dead and the wounded back to
     Medina. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 584: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     (The Prophet said), "Healing is in three things: A gulp of honey, cupping, and
     branding with fire (cauterizing)." But I forbid my followers to use (cauterization)
     branding with fire." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 585: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "Healing is in three things: cupping, a gulp of honey or
     cauterization, (branding with fire) but I forbid my followers to use cauterization
     (branding with fire)." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 586: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to like sweet edible things and honey. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 587: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "If there is any healing in your medicines, then it is in
     cupping, a gulp of honey or branding with fire (cauterization) that suits the ailment,
     but I don't like to be (cauterized) branded with fire." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 588: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     A man came to the Prophet and said, "My brother has some abdominal trouble."
     The Prophet said to him "Let him drink honey." The man came for the second time
     and the Prophet said to him, 'Let him drink honey." He came for the third time and
     the Prophet said, "Let him drink honey." He returned again and said, "I have done
     that ' The Prophet then said, "Allah has said the truth, but your brother's abdomen
     has told a lie. Let him drink honey." So he made him drink honey and he was
     cured. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 589: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Some people were sick and they said, "O Allah's Apostle! Give us shelter and
     food. So when they became healthy they said, "The weather of Medina is not
     suitable for us." So he sent them to Al-Harra with some she-camels of his and said,
     "Drink of their milk." But when they became healthy, they killed the shepherd of the
     Prophet and drove away his camels. The Prophet sent some people in their pursuit.
     Then he got their hands and feet cut and their eyes were branded with heated
     pieces of iron. I saw one of them licking the earth with his tongue till he died. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 590: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The climate of Medina did not suit some people, so the Prophet ordered them to
     follow his shepherd, i.e. his camels, and drink their milk and urine (as a medicine).
     So they followed the shepherd that is the camels and drank their milk and urine till
     their bodies became healthy. Then they killed the shepherd and drove away the
     camels. When the news reached the Prophet he sent some people in their pursuit.
     When they were brought, he cut their hands and feet and their eyes were branded
     with heated pieces of iron. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 591: 

     Narrated Khalid bin Sad: 

     We went out and Ghalib bin Abjar was accompanying us. He fell ill on the way
     and when we arrived at Medina he was still sick. Ibn Abi 'Atiq came to visit him
     and said to us, "Treat him with black cumin. Take five or seven seeds and crush
     them (mix the powder with oil) and drop the resulting mixture into both nostrils, for
     'Aisha has narrated to me that she heard the Prophet saying, 'This black cumin is
     healing for all diseases except As-Sam.' Aisha said, 'What is As-Sam?' He said,
     'Death." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 592: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "There is healing in black cumin for all diseases
     except death." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 593: 

     Narrated 'Ursa: 

     Aisha used to recommend At-Talbina for the sick and for such a person as grieved
     over a dead person. She used to say, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'At-Talbina
     gives rest to the heart of the patient and makes it active and relieves some of his
     sorrow and grief.' " 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 594: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     'Aisha used to recommend At-Talbina and used to say, "It is disliked (by the
     patient) although it is beneficial.'' 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 595: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet was cupped and he paid the wages to the one who had cupped him
     and then took Su'ut (Medicine sniffed by nose). 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 596: 

     Narrated Um Qais bint Mihsan: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Treat with the Indian incense, for it has healing for
     seven diseases; it is to be sniffed by one having throat trouble, and to be put into
     one side of the mouth of one suffering from pleurisy." Once I went to Allah's
     Apostle with a son of mine who would not eat any food, and the boy passed urine
     on him whereupon he asked for some water and sprinkled it over the place of
     urine. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 597: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet was cupped while he was fasting. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 598: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet was cupped while he was in a state of Ihram. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 599: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     that he was asked about the wages of the one who cups others. He said, 'Allah's
     Apostle was cupped by Abd Taiba, to whom he gave two Sa of food and
     interceded for him with his masters who consequently reduced what they used to
     charge him daily. Then the Prophet s said, "The best medicines you may treat
     yourselves with are cupping and sea incense.' He added, "You should not torture
     your children by treating tonsillitis by pressing the tonsils or the palate with the
     finger, but use incense." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 600: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     that he paid Al-Muqanna a visit during his illness and said, "I will not leave till he
     gets cupped, for I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "There is healing in cupping." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 601: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina: 

     Allah's Apostle was cupped on the middle of his head at Lahl Jamal on his way to
     Mecca while he was in a state of Ihram. Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: Allah's Apostle was
     cupped on his head. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 602: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet was cupped on his head for an ailment he was suffering from while he
     was in a state of Ihram. at a water place called Lahl Jamal. Ibn 'Abbas further said:
     Allah s Apostle was cupped on his head for unilateral headache while he was in a
     state of Ihram . 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 603: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "If there is any good in your medicines, then it is in a
     gulp of honey, a cupping operation, or branding (cauterization), but I do not like to
     be (cauterized) branded. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 604: 

     Narrated Ka'b bin Ujrah: 

     The Prophet came to me during the period of Al-Hudaibiya, while I was lighting
     fire underneath a cooking pot and lice were falling down my head. He said, "Do
     your lice hurt your?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Shave your head and fast for three
     days or feed six poor persons or slaughter a sheep as a sacrifice:" 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 605: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet said, "If there is any healing in your medicines then it is a cupping
     operation, or branding (cauterization), but I do not like to be (cauterized)
     branded." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 606: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle said, 'Nations were displayed before me; one or two prophets
     would pass by along with a few followers. A prophet would pass by accompanied
     by nobody. Then a big crowd of people passed in front of me and I asked, Who
     are they Are they my followers?" It was said, 'No. It is Moses and his followers It
     was said to me, 'Look at the horizon.'' Behold! There was a multitude of people
     filling the horizon. Then it was said to me, 'Look there and there about the
     stretching sky! Behold! There was a multitude filling the horizon,' It was said to me,
     'This is your nation out of whom seventy thousand shall enter Paradise without
     reckoning.' "Then the Prophet entered his house without telling his companions
     who they (the 70,000) were. So the people started talking about the issue and
     said, "It is we who have believed in Allah and followed His Apostle; therefore
     those people are either ourselves or our children who are born m the Islamic era,
     for we were born in the Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance.'' When the Prophet heard
     of that, he came out and said. "Those people are those who do not treat
     themselves with Ruqya, nor do they believe in bad or good omen (from birds etc.)
     nor do they get themselves branded (Cauterized). but they put their trust (only) in
     their Lord " On that 'Ukasha bin Muhsin said. "Am I one of them, O Allah's
     Apostle?' The Prophet said, "Yes." Then another person got up and said, "Am I
     one of them?" The Prophet said, 'Ukasha has anticipated you." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 607: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     The husband of a lady died and her eyes became sore and the people mentioned
     her story to the Prophet They asked him whether it was permissible for her to use
     kohl as her eyes were exposed to danger. He said, "Previously, when one of you
     was bereaved by a husband she would stay in her dirty clothes in a bad unhealthy
     house (for one year), and when a dog passed by, she would throw a globe of
     dung. No, (she should observe the prescribed period Idda) for four months and
     ten days.' 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 608: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, '(There is) no 'Adwa (no contagious disease is conveyed
     without Allah's permission). nor is there any bad omen (from birds), nor is there
     any Hamah, nor is there any bad omen in the month of Safar, and one should run
     away from the leper as one runs away from a lion '' 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 609: 

     Narrated Said bin Zaid: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Truffles are like Manna (i.e. they grow naturally
     without man's care) and their water heals eye diseases." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 610: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas and 'Aisha: 

     Abu Bakr kissed (the forehead of) the Prophet when he was dead. 'Aisha added:
     We put medicine in one side of his mouth but he started waving us not to insert the
     medicine into his mouth. We said, "He dislikes the medicine as a patient usually
     does." But when he came to his senses he said, "Did I not forbid you to put
     medicine (by force) in the side of my mouth?" We said, "We thought it was just
     because a patient usually dislikes medicine." He said, "None of those who are in
     the house but will be forced to take medicine in the side of his mouth while I am
     watching, except Al-'Abbas, for he had not witnessed your deed." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 611: 

     Narrated Um Qais: 

     I went to Allah's Apostle along with a a son of mine whose palate and tonsils I had
     pressed with my finger as a treatment for a (throat and tonsil) disease. The Prophet
     said, "Why do you pain your children by pressing their throats! Use Ud Al-Hindi
     (certain Indian incense) for it cures seven diseases, one of which is pleurisy. It is
     used as a snuff for treating throat and tonsil disease and it is inserted into one side
     of the mouth of one suffering from pleurisy." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 612: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) 

     When the health of Allah's Apostle deteriorated and his condition became serious,
     he asked the permission of all his wives to allow him to be treated In my house,
     and they allowed him. He came out, supported by two men and his legs were
     dragging on the ground between Abbas and another man. (The sub-narrator told
     Ibn 'Abbas who said: Do you know who was the other man whom 'Aisha did not
     mention? The sub-narrator said: No. Ibn Abbas said: It was 'Ali.) 'Aisha added:
     When the Prophet entered my house and his disease became aggravated, he said,
     "Pour on me seven water skins full of water (the tying ribbons of which had not
     been untied) so that I may give some advice to the people." So we made him sit in
     a tub belonging to Hafsa, the wife of the Prophet and started pouring water on him
     from those water skins till he waved us to stop. Then he went out to the people
     and led them in prayer and delivered a speech before them. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 613: 

     Narrated Um Qais : 

     that she took to Allah's Apostle one of her sons whose palate and tonsils she had
     pressed because he had throat trouble. The Prophet said, "Why do you pain your
     children by getting the palate pressed like that? Use the Ud Al-Hindi (certain
     Indian incense) for it cures seven diseases one of which is pleurisy." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 614: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     A man came to the prophet and said, 'My brother has got loose motions. The
     Prophet said, Let him drink honey." The man again (came) and said, 'I made him
     drink (honey) but that made him worse.' The Prophet said, 'Allah has said the
     Truth, and the abdomen of your brother has told a lie." (See Hadith No. 88) 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 615: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, 'There is no 'Adha (no disease is conveyed from the sick to
     the healthy without Allah's permission), nor Safar, nor Hama." A bedouin stood up
     and said, "Then what about my camels? They are like deer on the sand, but when a
     mangy camel comes and mixes with them, they all get infected with mangy." The
     Prophet said, "Then who conveyed the (mange) disease to the first one?" 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 616: 

     Narrated Um Oais: 

     that she took to Allah's Apostle one of her sons whose palate and tonsils she had
     pressed to treat a throat trouble. The Prophet said, "Be afraid of Allah! Why do
     you pain your children by having their tonsils pressed like that? Use the Ud
     Al-Hindi (a certain Indian incense) for it cures seven diseases, one of which is
     pleurisy." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 617: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle allowed one of the Ansar families to treat persons who have taken
     poison and also who are suffering from ear ailment with Ruqya. Anas added: I got
     myself branded cauterized) for pleurisy, when Allah's Apostle was still alive. Abu
     Talha, Anas bin An-Nadr and Zaid bin Thabit witnessed that, and it was Abu
     Talha who branded (cauterized) me. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 618: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Saud As-Sa'idi: 

     When the helmet broke on the head of the Prophet and his face became covered
     with blood and his incisor tooth broke (i.e. during the battle of Uhud), 'Ali used to
     bring water in his shield while Fatima was washing the blood off his face. When
     Fatima saw that the bleeding increased because of the water, she took a mat (of
     palm leaves), burnt it, and stuck it (the burnt ashes) on the wound of Allah's
     Apostle, whereupon the bleeding stopped. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 619: 

     Narrated Nazi': 

     Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "The Prophet said, 'Fever is from the heat of Hell, so put
     it out (cool it) with water.' " Nafi' added: 'Abdullah used to say, "O Allah! Relieve
     us from the punishment," (when he suffered from fever). 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 620: 

     Narrated Fatima bint Al-Mundhir: 

     Whenever a lady suffering from fever was brought to Asma' bint Abu Bakr, she
     used to invoke Allah for her and then sprinkle some water on her body, at the
     chest and say, "Allah's Apostle used to order us to abate fever with water." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 621: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "Fever is from the heat of Hell, so abate fever with water." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 622: 

     Narrated Rafi bin Khadij: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Fever is from the heat of Hell, so abate fever with
     water." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 623: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Some people from the tribes of 'Ukl and 'Uraina came to Allah's Apostle and
     embraced Islam and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are owners of livestock and
     have never been farmers," and they found the climate of Medina unsuitable for
     them. So Allah's Apostle ordered that they be given some camels and a shepherd,
     and ordered them to go out with those camels and drink their milk and urine. So
     they set out, but when they reached a place called Al-Harra, they reverted to
     disbelief after their conversion to Islam, killed the shepherd and drove away the
     camels. When this news reached the Prophet he sent in their pursuit (and they were
     caught and brought). The Prophet ordered that their eyes be branded with heated
     iron bars and their hands be cut off, and they were left at Al-Harra till they died in
     that state. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 624: 

     Narrated Saud: 

     The Prophet said, "If you hear of an outbreak of plague in a land, do not enter it;
     but if the plague breaks out in a place while you are in it, do not leave that place." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 625: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     'Umar bin Al-Khattab departed for Sham and when he reached Sargh, the
     commanders of the (Muslim) army, Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah and his companions
     met him and told him that an epidemic had broken out in Sham. 'Umar said, "Call
     for me the early emigrants." So 'Umar called them, consulted them and informed
     them that an epidemic had broken out in Sham. Those people differed in their
     opinions. Some of them said, "We have come out for a purpose and we do not
     think that it is proper to give it up," while others said (to 'Umar), "You have along
     with you. other people and the companions of Allah's Apostle so do not advise
     that we take them to this epidemic." 'Umar said to them, "Leave me now." Then he
     said, "Call the Ansar for me." I called them and he consulted them and they
     followed the way of the emigrants and differed as they did. He then said to them,
     Leave me now," and added, "Call for me the old people of Quraish who emigrated
     in the year of the Conquest of Mecca." I called them and they gave a unanimous
     opinion saying, "We advise that you should return with the people and do not take
     them to that (place) of epidemic." So 'Umar made an announcement, "I will ride
     back to Medina in the morning, so you should do the same." Abu 'Ubaida bin
     Al-Jarrah said (to 'Umar), "Are you running away from what Allah had ordained?"
     'Umar said, "Would that someone else had said such a thing, O Abu 'Ubaida! Yes,
     we are running from what Allah had ordained to what Allah has ordained. Don't
     you agree that if you had camels that went down a valley having two places, one
     green and the other dry, you would graze them on the green one only if Allah had
     ordained that, and you would graze them on the dry one only if Allah had ordained
     that?" At that time 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf, who had been absent because of
     some job, came and said, "I have some knowledge about this. I have heard Allah's
     Apostle saying, 'If you hear about it (an outbreak of plague) in a land, do not go to
     it; but if plague breaks out in a country where you are staying, do not run away
     from it.' " 'Umar thanked Allah and returned to Medina. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 626: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amir 

     'Umar went to Sham and when h ached Sargh, he got the news that an epidemic
     (of plague) had broken out in Sham. 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf told him that Allah's
     Apostle said, "If you hear that it (plague) has broken out in a land, do not go to it;
     but if it breaks out in a land where you are present, do not go out escaping from it."


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 627: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Neither Messiah (Ad-Dajjal) nor plague will enter Medina." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 628: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "(Death from) plague is martyrdom for every Muslim." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 629: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "He (a Muslim) who dies of an abdominal disease is a a martyr,
     and he who dies of plague is a martyr." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 630: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) that she asked Allah's Apostle about plague, and Allah's
     Apostle informed her saying, "Plague was a punishment which Allah used to send
     on whom He wished, but Allah made it a blessing for the believers. None (among
     the believers) remains patient in a land in which plague has broken out and
     considers that nothing will befall him except what Allah has ordained for him, but
     that Allah will grant him a reward similar to that of a martyr." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 631: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     During the Prophet's fatal illness, he used to recite the Mu'auwidhat (Surat An-Nas
     and Surat Al-Falaq) and then blow his breath over his body. When his illness was
     aggravated, I used to recite those two Suras and blow my breath over him and
     make him rub his body with his own hand for its blessings." (Ma'mar asked
     Az-Zuhri: How did the Prophet use to blow? Az-Zuhri said: He used to blow on
     his hands and then passed them over his face.) 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 632: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Some of the companions of the Prophet came across a tribe amongst the tribes of
     the Arabs, and that tribe did not entertain them. While they were in that state, the
     chief of that tribe was bitten by a snake (or stung by a scorpion). They said, (to the
     companions of the Prophet ), "Have you got any medicine with you or anybody
     who can treat with Ruqya?" The Prophet's companions said, "You refuse to
     entertain us, so we will not treat (your chief) unless you pay us for it." So they
     agreed to pay them a flock of sheep. One of them (the Prophet's companions)
     started reciting Surat-al-Fatiha and gathering his saliva and spitting it (at the
     snake-bite). The patient got cured and his people presented the sheep to them, but
     they said, "We will not take it unless we ask the Prophet (whether it is lawful)."
     When they asked him, he smiled and said, "How do you know that Surat-al-Fatiha
     is a Ruqya? Take it (flock of sheep) and assign a share for me." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 633: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Some of the companions of the Prophet passed by some people staying at a place
     where there was water, and one of those people had been stung by a scorpion. A
     man from those staying near the water, came and said to the companions of the
     Prophet, "Is there anyone among you who can do Ruqya as near the water there is
     a person who has been stung by a scorpion." So one of the Prophet's companions
     went to him and recited Surat-al-Fatiha for a sheep as his fees. The patient got
     cured and the man brought the sheep to his companions who disliked that and said,
     "You have taken wages for reciting Allah's Book." When they arrived at Medina,
     they said, ' O Allah's Apostle! (This person) has taken wages for reciting Allah's
     Book" On that Allah's Apostle said, "You are most entitled to take wages for
     doing a Ruqya with Allah's Book." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 634: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet ordered me or somebody else to do Ruqya (if there was danger)
     from an evil eye. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 635: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     that the Prophet saw in her house a girl whose face had a black spot. He said.
     "She is under the effect of an evil eye; so treat her with a Ruqya." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 636: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The effect of an evil eye is a fact." And he prohibited tattooing 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 637: 

     Narrated Al-Aswad: 

     I asked 'Aisha about treating poisonous stings (a snake-bite or a scorpion sting)
     with a Ruqya. She said, "The Prophet allowed the treatment of poisonous sting
     with Ruqya." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 638: 

     Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz: 

     Thabit and I went to Anas bin Malik. Thabit said, "O Abu Hamza! I am sick." On
     that Anas said, "Shall I treat you with the Ruqya of Allah's Apostle?" Thabit said,
     "Yes," Anas recited, "O Allah! The Lord of the people, the Remover of trouble!
     (Please) cure (Heal) (this patient), for You are the Healer. None brings about
     healing but You; a healing that will leave behind no ailment." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 639: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to treat some of his wives by passing his right hand over the
     place of ailment and used to say, "O Allah, the Lord of the people! Remove the
     trouble and heal the patient, for You are the Healer. No healing is of any avail but
     Yours; healing that will leave behind no ailment." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 640: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to treat with a Ruqya saying, "O the Lord of the people!
     Remove the trouble The cure is in Your Hands, and there is none except You who
     can remove it (the disease) . " 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 641: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to say to the patient, "In the Name of Allah The earth of our land
     and the saliva of some of us cure our patient." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 642: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to read in his Ruqya, "In the Name of Allah" The earth of our
     land and the saliva of some of us cure our patient with the permission of our Lord."
     with a slight shower of saliva) while treating with a Ruqya. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 643: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "A good dream is from Allah, and a bad dream is from
     Satan. So if anyone of you sees (in a dream) something he dislikes, when he gets
     up he should blow thrice (on his left side) and seek refuge with Allah from its evil
     for then it will not harm him." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 644: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle went to bed, he used to recite Surat-al-Ikhlas,
     Surat-al-Falaq and Surat-an-Nas and then blow on his palms and pass them over
     his face and those parts of his body that his hands could reach. And when he fell ill,
     he used to order me to do like that for him. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 645: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     A group of the companions of Allah's Apostle proceeded on a journey till they
     dismounted near one of the Arab tribes and requested them to entertain them as
     their guests, but they (the tribe people) refused to entertain them. Then the chief of
     that tribe was bitten by a snake (or stung by a scorpion) and he was given all sorts
     of treatment, but all in vain. Some of them said, "Will you go to the group (those
     travelers) who have dismounted near you and see if one of them has something
     useful?" They came to them and said, "O the group! Our leader has been bitten by
     a snake (or stung by a scorpion) and we have treated him with everything but
     nothing benefited him Has anyone of you anything useful?" One of them replied,
     "Yes, by Allah, I know how to treat with a Ruqya. But. by Allah, we wanted you
     to receive us as your guests but you refused. I will not treat your patient with a
     Ruqya till you fix for us something as wages." Consequently they agreed to give
     those travellers a flock of sheep. The man went with them (the people of the tribe)
     and started spitting (on the bite) and reciting Surat-al-Fatiha till the patient was
     healed and started walking as if he had not been sick. When the tribe people paid
     them their wages they had agreed upon, some of them (the Prophet's companions)
     said, "Distribute (the sheep)." But the one who treated with the Ruqya said, "Do
     not do that till we go to Allah's Apostle and mention to him what has happened,
     and see what he will order us." So they came to Allah's Apostle and mentioned the
     story to him and he said, "How do you know that Surat-al-Fatiha is a Ruqya? You
     have done the right thing. Divide (what you have got) and assign for me a share
     with you." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 646: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to treat some of his wives by passing his right hand over the
     place of ailment and used to say, "O Lord of the people! Remove the difficulty and
     bring about healing as You are the Healer. There is no healing but Your Healing, a
     healing that will leave no ailment." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 647: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet, during his fatal ailment used to blow (on his hands and pass them)
     over his body while reciting the Mu'auwidhat (Surat-an-Nas and Surat-al-Falaq).
     When his disease got aggravated, I used to recite them for him and blow (on his
     hands) and let him pass his hands over his body because of its blessing. (Ma'mar
     asked Ibn Shihab: How did he use to do Nafth? He said: He used to blow on his
     hands and then pass them over his face.) 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 648: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet once came out to us and said, "Some nations were displayed before
     me. A prophet would pass in front of me with one man, and another with two men,
     and another with a group of people. and another with nobody with him. Then I saw
     a great crowd covering the horizon and I wished that they were my followers, but it
     was said to me, 'This is Moses and his followers.' Then it was said to me, 'Look'' I
     looked and saw a big gathering with a large number of people covering the
     horizon. It was said, "Look this way and that way.' So I saw a big crowd covering
     the horizon. Then it was said to me, "These are your followers, and among them
     there are 70,000 who will enter Paradise without (being asked about their)
     accounts. " Then the people dispersed and the Prophet did not tell who those
     70,000 were. So the companions of the Prophet started talking about that and
     some of them said, "As regards us, we were born in the era of heathenism, but then
     we believed in Allah and His Apostle . We think however, that these (70,000) are
     our offspring." That talk reached the Prophet who said, "These (70,000) are the
     people who do not draw an evil omen from (birds) and do not get treated by
     branding themselves and do not treat with Ruqya, but put their trust (only) in their
     Lord." then 'Ukasha bin Muhsin got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Am I one of
     those (70,000)?" The Prophet said, "Yes." Then another person got up and said,
     "Am I one of them?" The Prophet said, " 'Ukasha has anticipated you." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 649: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There is neither 'Adha (no contagious disease is conveyed to
     others without Allah's permission) nor Tiyara, but an evil omen may be in three a
     woman, a house or an animal." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 650: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "There is no Tiyara, and the best omen is the Fal."
     They asked, "What is the Fal?" He said, "A good word that one of you hears (and
     takes as a good omen)." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 651: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "There is no Tiyara and the best omen is the Fal," Somebody
     said, "What is the Fal, O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "A good word that one of you
     hears (and takes as a good omen)." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 652: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "No 'Adha (no contagious disease is conveyed to others without
     Allah's permission), nor Tiyara, but I like the good Fal, i.e., the good word." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 653: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "There is no 'Adha, nor Tiyara, nor Hama, nor Safar." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 654: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     Allah's Apostle gave his verdict about two ladies of the Hudhail tribe who had
     fought each other and one of them had hit the other with a stone. The stone hit her
     abdomen and as she was pregnant, the blow killed the child in her womb. They
     both filed their case with the Prophet and he judged that the blood money for what
     was in her womb. was a slave or a female slave. The guardian of the lady who was
     fined said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I be fined for a creature that has neither drunk
     nor eaten, neither spoke nor cried? A case like that should be nullified." On that the
     Prophet said, "This is one of the brothers of soothsayers. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 655: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Two ladies (had a fight) and one of them hit the other with a stone on the abdomen
     and caused her to abort. The Prophet judged that the victim be given either a slave
     or a female slave (as blood-money). Narrated Ibn Shihab: Said bin Al-Musayyab
     said, "Allah's Apostle judged that in case of child killed in the womb of its mother,
     the offender should give the mother a slave or a female slave in recompense The
     offender said, How can I be fined for killing one who neither ate nor drank, neither
     spoke nor cried: a case like that should be denied ' On that Allah's Apostle said
     'He is one of the brothers of the foretellers 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 656: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet forbade the utilization of the price of a dog, the earnings of prostitute
     and the earnings of a foreteller 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 657: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Some people asked Allah's Apostle about the fore-tellers He said. ' They are
     nothing" They said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Sometimes they tell us of a thing which
     turns out to be true." Allah's Apostle said, "A Jinn snatches that true word and
     pours it Into the ear of his friend (the fore-teller) (as one puts something into a
     bottle) The foreteller then mixes with that word one hundred lies." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 658: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     A man called Labid bin al-A'sam from the tribe of Bani Zaraiq worked magic on
     Allah's Apostle till Allah's Apostle started imagining that he had done a thing that he
     had not really done. One day or one night he was with us, he invoked Allah and
     invoked for a long period, and then said, "O 'Aisha! Do you know that Allah has
     instructed me concerning the matter I have asked him about? Two men came to
     me and one of them sat near my head and the other near my feet. One of them said
     to his companion, "What is the disease of this man?" The other replied, "He is
     under the effect of magic.' The first one asked, 'Who has worked the magic on
     him?' The other replied, "Labid bin Al-A'sam.' The first one asked, 'What material
     did he use?' The other replied, 'A comb and the hairs stuck to it and the skin of
     pollen of a male date palm.' The first one asked, 'Where is that?' The other replied,
     '(That is) in the well of Dharwan;' " So Allah's Apostle along with some of his
     companions went there and came back saying, "O 'Aisha, the color of its water is
     like the infusion of Henna leaves. The tops of the date-palm trees near it are like
     the heads of the devils." I asked. "O Allah's Apostle? Why did you not show it (to
     the people)?" He said, "Since Allah cured me, I disliked to let evil spread among
     the people." Then he ordered that the well be filled up with earth. 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 659: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Avoid the Mubiqat, i.e., shirk and witchcraft." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 660: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Magic was worked on Allah's Apostle so that he used to think that he had sexual
     relations with his wives while he actually had not (Sufyan said: That is the hardest
     kind of magic as it has such an effect). Then one day he said, "O 'Aisha do you
     know that Allah has instructed me concerning the matter I asked Him about? Two
     men came to me and one of them sat near my head and the other sat near my feet.
     The one near my head asked the other. What is wrong with this man?' The latter
     replied the is under the effect of magic The first one asked, Who has worked
     magic on him?' The other replied Labid bin Al-A'sam, a man from Bani Zuraiq
     who was an ally of the Jews and was a hypocrite.' The first one asked, What
     material did he use)?' The other replied, 'A comb and the hair stuck to it.' The first
     one asked, 'Where (is that)?' The other replied. 'In a skin of pollen of a male date
     palm tree kept under a stone in the well of Dharwan' '' So the Prophet went to that
     well and took out those things and said "That was the well which was shown to me
     (in a dream) Its water looked like the infusion of Henna leaves and its date-palm
     trees looked like the heads of devils." The Prophet added, "Then that thing was
     taken out' I said (to the Prophet ) "Why do you not treat yourself with Nashra?"
     He said, "Allah has cured me; I dislike to let evil spread among my people." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 661: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Magic was worked on Allah's Apostle so that he began to imagine that he had
     done something although he had not. One day while he was with me, he invoked
     Allah and invoked for a long period and then said, "O 'Aisha! Do you know that
     Allah has instructed me regarding the matter I asked Him about?" I asked, "What
     is that, O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "Two men came to me; one of them sat near
     my head and the other sat near my feet. One of them asked his companion, 'What
     is the disease of this man?' The other replied, 'He is under the effect of magic.' The
     first one asked, 'Who has worked magic on him?" The other replied, 'Labid bin
     A'sam, a Jew from the tribe of Bani Zuraiq.' The (first one asked), 'With what has
     it been done?' The other replied, 'With a a comb and the hair stuck to it and a skin
     of the pollen of a male datepalm tree.' The first one asked, 'Where is it?' The other
     replied, 'In the well of Dharwan.' Then the Prophet went along with some of his
     companions to that well and looked at that and there were date palms near to it.
     Then he returned to me and said, 'By Allah the water of that well was (red) like the
     infusion of Henna leaves and its date-palms were like the heads of devils" I said, O
     Allah's Apostle! Did you take those materials out of the pollen skin?" He said, 'No!
     As for me Allah has healed me and cured me and I was afraid that (by Showing
     that to the people) I would spread evil among them when he ordered that the well
     be filled up with earth, and it was filled up with earth " 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 662: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Two men came from the East and addressed the people who wondered at their
     eloquent speeches On that Allah's Apostle said. Some eloquent speech is as
     effective as magic.' 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 663: 

     Narrated Saud: 

     The Prophet said, "If somebody takes some 'Ajwa dates every morning, he will not
     be effected by poison or magic on that day till night." (Another narrator said seven
     dates). 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 664: 

     Narrated Saud: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "If Somebody takes seven 'Ajwa dates in the
     morning, neither magic nor poison will hurt him that day." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 665o: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, 'No 'Adha (i.e. no contagious disease is conveyed to others
     without Allah's permission); nor (any evil omen m the month of) Safar; nor Hama"
     A bedouin said, "O Allah's Apostle! What about the camels which, when on the
     sand (desert) look like deers, but when a mangy camel mixes with them they all get
     infected with mange?" On that Allah s Apostle said, "Then who conveyed the
     (mange) disease to the first (mangy) 

     camel?" 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 665e: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said: The cattle (sheep, cows, camels, etc.) suffering from a disease
     should not be mixed up with healthy cattle, (or said: "Do not put a patient with a
     healthy person ). " (as a precaution). 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 666: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "there is neither 'Adha nor Tiyara, and an evil omen is only in
     three: a horse, a woman and a house." (See the foot-note of Hadith No. 649) 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 667: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "No 'Adha." Abu Huraira also said: The Prophet said, "The
     cattle suffering from a disease should not be mixed up with healthy cattle (or said
     "Do not put a patient with a healthy person as a precaution.") Abu Huraira also
     said: Allah's Apostle said, "No 'Adha." A bedouin got up and said, "Don't you see
     how camels on the sand look like deer but when a mangy camel mixes with them,
     they all get infected with mange?" On that the Prophet said, "Then who conveyed
     the (mange) disease to the first camel?" 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 668: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "No 'Adha nor Tiyara; but I like Fal." They said, "What is the
     Fal?" He said, "A good word." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 669: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     When Khaibar was conquered, Allah's Apostle was presented with a poisoned
     (roasted) sheep. Allah's Apostle said, "Collect for me all the Jews present in this
     area." (When they were gathered) Allah's Apostle said to them, "I am going to ask
     you about something; will you tell me the truth?" They replied, "Yes, O
     Abal-Qasim!" Allah's Apostle said to them, "Who is your father?" They said, "Our
     father is so-and-so." Allah's Apostle said, "You have told a lie. for your father is
     so-and-so," They said, "No doubt, you have said the truth and done the correct
     thing." He again said to them, "If I ask you about something; will you tell me the
     truth?" They replied, "Yes, O Abal-Qasim! And if we should tell a lie you will
     know it as you have known it regarding our father," Allah's Apostle then asked,
     "Who are the people of the (Hell) Fire?" They replied, "We will remain in the (Hell)
     Fire for a while and then you (Muslims) will replace us in it" Allah's Apostle said to
     them. ''You will abide in it with ignominy. By Allah, we shall never replace you in it
     at all." Then he asked them again, "If I ask you something, will you tell me the
     truth?" They replied, "Yes." He asked. "Have you put the poison in this roasted
     sheep?" They replied, "Yes," He asked, "What made you do that?" They replied,
     "We intended to learn if you were a liar in which case we would be relieved from
     you, and if you were a prophet then it would not harm you." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 670: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever purposely throws himself from a mountain and kills
     himself, will be in the (Hell) Fire falling down into it and abiding therein perpetually
     forever; and whoever drinks poison and kills himself with it, he will be carrying his
     poison in his hand and drinking it in the (Hell) Fire wherein he will abide eternally
     forever; and whoever kills himself with an iron weapon, will be carrying that
     weapon in his hand and stabbing his abdomen with it in the (Hell) Fire wherein he
     will abide eternally forever." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 671: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Whoever takes seven 'Ajwa dates in the morning
     will not be effected by magic or poison on that day." 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 672: 

     Narrated Abu Tha'laba Al-Khushani: 

     The Prophet forbade the eating of wild animals having fangs. (Az-Zuhri said: I did
     not hear this narration except when I went to Sham.) Al-Laith said: Narrated
     Yunus: I asked Ibn Shihab, "May we perform the ablution with the milk of
     she-asses or drink it, or drink the bile of wild animals or urine of camels?" He
     replied, "The Muslims used to treat themselves with that and did not see any harm
     in it. As for the milk of she-asses, we have learnt that Allah's Apostle forbade the
     eating of their meat, but we have not received any information whether drinking of
     their milk is allowed or forbidden." As for the bile of wild animals, Ibn Shihab said,
     "Abu Idris Al-Khaulani told me that Allah's Apostle forbade the eating of the flesh
     of every wild beast having fangs . " 


Volume 7, Book 71, Number 673: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If a fly falls in the vessel of any of you, let him dip all of it
     (into the vessel) and then throw it away, for in one of its wings there is a disease
     and in the other there is healing (antidote for it) i e. the treatment for that disease." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 72: 

                               Dress 



Volume 7, Book 72, Number 674: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, 'Allah will not look at the person who drags his garment
     (behind him) out of conceit.'' 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 675: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said Allah will not look, on the Day of Resurrection at the person who
     drags his garment (behind him) out of conceit. On that Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! One side of my Izar hangs low if I do not take care of it." The Prophet
     said, 'You are not one of those who do that out of conceit." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 676: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     The solar eclipse occurred while we were sitting with the Prophet He got up
     dragging his garment (on the ground) hurriedly till he reached the mosque The
     people turned (to the mosque) and he offered a two-Rak'at prayer whereupon the
     eclipse was over and he traced us and said, "The sun and the moon are two signs
     among the signs of Allah, so if you see a thing like this (eclipse) then offer the
     prayer and invoke Allah till He remove that state," 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 677: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     I saw Bilal bringing an 'Anza (a small spear) and fixing it in the ground, and then he
     proclaimed the Iqarna of the prayer, and I saw Allah's Apostle coming out,
     wearing a cloak with its sleeves rolled up. He then offered a two-Rak'at prayer
     while facing the 'Anza, and I saw the people and animals passing in front of him
     beyond the 'Anza. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 678: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The part of an Izar which hangs below the ankles is in the Fire."


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 679: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle, "Allah will not look, on the Day of Resurrection, at a person who
     drags his Izar (behind him) out of pride and arrogance 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 680: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet (or 'Abul Qasim) said, "While a man was walking, clad in a two-piece
     garment and proud of himself with his hair well-combed, suddenly Allah made him
     sink into the earth and he will go on sinking into it till the Day of Resurrection. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 681: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "While a man was dragging his Izar on the ground (behind
     him), suddenly Allah made him sink into the earth and he will go on sinking into it
     till the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 682: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     that he heard the Prophet (narrating as above No. 680). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 683: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever drags his clothes (on the ground) out of pride and
     arrogance, Allah will not look at him on the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 684: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) 

     The wife of Rifa'a Al-Qurazi came to Allah's Apostle while I was sitting, and Abu
     Bakr was also there. She said, 'O Allah s Apostle! I was the wife of Rifa'a and he
     divorced me irrevocably. Then I married AbdurRahman bin Az-Zubair who, by
     Allah, O Allah's Apostle, has only something like a fringe of a garment, Showing
     the fringe of her veil. Khalid bin Sa'id, who was standing at the door, for he had
     not been admitted, heard her statement and said, "O Abu Bakr! Why do you not
     stop this lady from saying such things openly before Allah's Apostle?" No, by
     Allah, Allah's Apostle did nothing but smiled. Then he said to the lady, "Perhaps
     you want to return to Rifa'a? That is impossible unless 'Abdur-Rahman
     consummates his marriage with you." That became the tradition after him. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 685: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     The Prophet asked for his Rida, put it on and set out walking. Zaid bin Haritha and
     I followed him till he reached the house where Harnza (bin 'Abdul Muttalib) was
     present and asked for permission to enter, and they gave us permission. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 686: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     A man asked, "O Allah s Apostle What kind of clothes should a Muhrim wear?"
     The Prophet, said, "A Muhrim should not wear a shirt, trousers a hooded cloak, or
     Khuffs (leather socks covering the ankles) unless he cannot get sandals, in which
     case he should cut the part (of the Khuff) that covers the ankles." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 687: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     The Prophet came to visit Abdullah bin Ubai (bin Salul) after he had been put in his
     grave. The Prophet ordered that 'Abdullah be taken out. He was taken out and
     was placed on the knees on the knees of the Prophet, who blew his (blessed)
     breath on him and dressed the body with his own shirt. And Allah knows better. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 688: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     When Abdullah bin Ubdi (bin Salul) died, his son came to Allah's Apostle and said
     ' O Allah's Apostle, give me your shirt so that I may shroud my fathers body in it.
     And please offer a funeral prayer for him and invoke Allah for his forgiveness." The
     Prophet gave him his shirt and said to him 'Inform us when you finish (and the
     funeral procession is ready) call us. When he had finished he told the Prophet and
     the Prophet proceeded to order his funeral prayers but Umar stopped him and
     said, "Didn't Allah forbid you to offer the funeral prayer for the hypocrites when He
     said: "Whether you (O Muhammad) ask forgiveness for them or ask not
     forgiveness for them: (and even) if you ask forgiveness for them seventy times.
     Allah will not forgive them." (9.80) Then there was revealed: "And never (O
     Muhammad) pray for any of them that dies, nor stand at his grave." (9.34)
     Thenceforth the Prophet did not offer funeral prayers for the hypocrites. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 689: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle has set forth an example for a miser and a charitable person by
     comparing them to two men wearing two iron cloaks and their hands are raised to
     their breasts and necks. Whenever the charitable man tries to give a charitable gift,
     his iron cloak expands till it becomes so wide that it will cover his fingertips and
     obliterate his tracks And, whenever the miser wants to give a charitable gift, his
     cloak becomes very tight over him and every ring gets stuck to its place Abu
     Huraira added; I saw Allah's Apostle putting his finger in the (chest) pocket of his
     shirt like that If you but saw him trying to widen (the opening of his shirt) but it did
     not widen 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 690: 

     Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba: 

     The Prophet went to answer the call of nature, and when he returned, I met him
     with water and he performed the ablution while he was wearing a Sham, cloak. He
     rinsed his mouth, put the water in his nose and blew it out, washed his face and
     tried to take his hands out of his sleeves, but they were too narrow, so he took out
     his hands from under his chest and washed them and then passed his wet hands
     over his head and Khuffs (leather socks) . 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 691: 

     Narrated Al-Mughira: 

     One night I was with the Prophet on a journey. He asked (me), "Have you got
     water with you?" I replied, "Yes" So he got down from his she-camel and went
     away till he disappeared in the darkness of the night. Then he came back and I
     poured water for him from the pot (for the ablution). He washed his face and
     hands while he was wearing a woollen cloak (the sleeves of which were narrow),
     so he could not take his arms out of it. So he took them out from underneath the
     cloak. Then he washed his forearms and passed his wet hands over his head. Then
     I tried to take off his Khuffs, but he said, "Leave them, for I have performed
     ablution before putting them on." And so he passed his wet hands over them 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 692: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama: 

     Allah's Apostle distributed some Qaba's but he did not give anything to
     Makhrama. Makhrama said (to me), "O my son! Let us go to Allah's Apostle." So
     I proceeded with him and he said, "Go in and call him 'or me." So I called the
     Prophet for him The Prophet came out to him, wearing one of those Qaba's and
     said, (to Makhrama), "I have kept this for you " Makhrama looked at it and said,
     "Makhrama is satisfied now" 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 693: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir: 

     A silken Farruj was presented to Allah's Apostle and he put it on and offered the
     prayer in it. When he finished the prayer, he took it off violently as if he disliked it
     and said, "This (garment) does not befit those who fear Allah!" 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 694: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     A man said, "O Allah's Apostle. What type of clothes should a Muhrim wear
     Allah's Apostle replied, 'Do not wear shirts, turbans trousers hooded cloaks or
     Khuffs; but if someone cannot get sandals, then he can wear Khuffs after cutting
     them short below the ankles. Do not wear clothes touched by saffon or wars (two
     kinds of perfumes) " 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 695: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever cannot get an Izar, can wear trousers, and whoever
     cannot wear sandals can wear Khuffs." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 696: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     A man got up and said, O Allah's Apostle! What do you order us to wear when
     we assume the state of Ihram?" The Prophet replied, "Do not wear shirts, trousers,
     turbans, hooded cloaks or Khuffs, but if a man has no sandals, he can wear Khuffs
     after cutting them short below the ankles; and do not wear clothes touched with
     (perfumes) of saffron or wars." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 697: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "A Muhrim should not wear a shirt, a turban, trousers, hooded
     cloaks, a garment touched with (perfumes) of saffron or wars, or Khuffs except if
     one has no sandals in which case he should cut short the Khuffs below the ankles." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 698: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Some Muslim men emigrated to Ethiopia whereupon Abu Bakr also prepared
     himself for the emigration, but the Prophet said (to him), "Wait, for I hope that
     Allah will allow me also to emigrate." Abu Bakr said, "Let my father and mother be
     sacrificed for you. Do you hope that (emigration)?" The Prophet said, 'Yes." So
     Abu Bakr waited to accompany the Prophet and fed two she-camels he had on
     the leaves of As-Samur tree regularly for four months One day while we were
     sitting in our house at midday, someone said to Abu Bakr, "Here is Allah's
     Apostle, coming with his head and a part of his face covered with a cloth-covering
     at an hour he never used to come to us." Abu Bakr said, "Let my father and
     mother be sacrificed for you, (O Prophet)! An urgent matter must have brought
     you here at this hour." The Prophet came and asked the permission to enter, and
     he was allowed. The Prophet entered and said to Abu Bakr, "Let those who are
     with you, go out." Abu Bakr replied, "(There is no stranger); they are your family.
     Let my father be sacrificed for you, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet said, "I have
     been allowed to leave (Mecca)." Abu Bakr said, " I shall accompany you, O
     Allah's Apostles, Let my father be sacrificed for you!" The Prophet said, "Yes,"
     Abu Bakr said, 'O Allah's Apostles! Let my father be sacrificed for you. Take one
     of these two she-camels of mine" The Prophet said. I will take it only after paying
     its price." So we prepared their baggage and put their journey food In a leather
     bag. And Asma' bint Abu Bakr cut a piece of her girdle and tied the mouth of the
     leather bag with it. That is why she was called Dhat-an-Nitaqaln. Then the Prophet
     and Abu Bakr went to a cave in a mountain called Thour and remained there for
     three nights. 'Abdullah bin Abu Bakr. who was a young intelligent man. used to
     stay with them at night and leave before dawn so that in the morning, he would he
     with the Quraish at Mecca as if he had spent the night among them. If he heard of
     any plot contrived by the Quraish against the Prophet and Abu Bakr, he would
     understand it and (return to) inform them of it when it became dark. 'Amir bin
     Fuhaira, the freed slave of Abu Bakr used to graze a flock of milch sheep for them
     and he used to take those sheep to them when an hour had passed after the 'Isha
     prayer. They would sleep soundly till 'Amir bin Fuhaira awakened them when it
     was still dark. He used to do that in each of those three nights. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 699: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     In the year of the conquest of Mecca the Prophet entered Mecca, wearing a
     helmet on his head. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 700: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once I was walking with Allah's Apostle and he was wearing a Najram Burd with
     thick margin. A bedouin followed him and pulled his Burd so violently that I
     noticed the side of the shoulder of Allah's Apostle affected by the margin of the
     Burd because of that violent pull. The Bedouin said, "O Muhammad! Give me
     some of Allah's wealth which is with you." Allah's Apostle turned and looked at
     him, and smiling, 'he ordered that he be given something. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 701: 

     Narrated Abu Hazim: 

     Shahl bin Sad said, "A lady came with a Burda. Sahl then asked (the people), "Do
     you know what Burda is?" Somebody said, "Yes. it is a Shamla with a woven
     border." Sahl added, "The lady said, 'O Allah's Apostle! I have knitted this
     (Burda) with my own hands for you to wear it." Allah's Apostle took it and he was
     in need of it. Allah's Apostle came out to us and he was wearing it as an Izar. A
     man from the people felt it and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Give it to me to wear.'
     The Prophet s said, 'Yes.' Then he sat there for some time (and when he went to
     his house), he folded it and sent it to him. The people said to that man, 'You have
     not done a right thing. You asked him for it, though you know that he does not put
     down anybody's request.' The man said, 'By Allah! I have only asked him so that it
     may be my shroud when I die." Sahl added, "Late it was his shroud." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 702: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying "From among my followers, a group (o 70,000) will
     enter Paradise without being asked for their accounts, Their faces will be shining
     like the moon." 'Ukasha bin Muhsin Al-Asadi got up, lifting his covering sheet and
     said, "O Allah's Apostle Invoke Allah for me that He may include me with them."
     The Prophet said! "O Allah! Make him from them." Then another man from
     Al-Ansar got up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah for me that He may
     include me with them." On that Allah's Apostle said, "'Ukasha has anticipated you."


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 703: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     I asked Anas, "What kind of clothes was most beloved to the Prophet?" He
     replied, "The Hibra (a kind of Yemenese cloth)." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 704: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The most beloved garment to the Prophet to wear was the Hibra (a kind of
     Yemenese cloth). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 705: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) When Allah's Apostle died, he was covered with a Hibra
     Burd (green square decorated garment). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 706: 

     Narrated 'Aisha and 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     When the disease of Allah's Apostle got aggravated, he covered his face with a
     Khamisa, but when he became short of breath, he would remove it from his face
     and say, "It is like that! May Allah curse the Jews Christians because they took the
     graves of their prophets as places of worship." By that he warned his follower of
     imitating them, by doing that which they did. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 707: 

     Narrated Abu Burda: 

     Aisha brought out to us a Kisa and an Izar and said, "The Prophet died while
     wearing these two." (Kisa, a square black piece of woolen cloth. Izar, a sheet cloth
     garment covering the lower half of the body). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 708: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle offered prayer while he was wearing a Khamisa of his that had
     printed marks. He looked at its marks and when he finished prayer, he said, "Take
     this Khamisa of mine to Abu Jahm, for it has just now diverted my attention from
     my prayer, and bring to me the Anbijania (a plain thick sheet) of Abu Jahm bin
     Hudhaifa bin Ghanim who belonged to Bani Adi bin Ka'b." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 709: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet had forbidden: (A) the Mulamasa and Munabadha (bargains), (B) the
     offering of two prayers, one after the morning compulsory prayer till the sun rises,
     and the others, after the 'Asr prayer till the sun sets (C) He also forbade that one
     should sit wearing one garment, nothing of which covers his private parts (D) and
     prevent them from exposure to the sky; (E) he also forbade Ishtimal-as-Samma'. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 710: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri 

     Allah's Apostle forbade two ways of wearing clothes and two kinds of dealings.
     (A) He forbade the dealings of the Mulamasa and the Munabadha. In the
     Mulamasa transaction the buyer just touches the garment he wants to buy at night
     or by daytime, and that touch would oblige him to buy it. In the Munabadha, one
     man throws his garment at another and the latter throws his at the former and the
     barter is complete and valid without examining the two objects or being satisfied
     with them (B) The two ways of wearing clothes were Ishtimal-as-Samma, i e., to
     cover one's shoulder with one's garment and leave the other bare: and the other
     way was to wrap oneself with a garment while one was sitting In such a way that
     nothing of that garment would cover one's private part 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 711: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade two types of dresses: (A) To sit in an Ihtiba' posture in one
     garment nothing of which covers his private parts. (B) to cover one side of his
     body with one garment and leave the other side bare The Prophet also forbade the
     Mulamasa and Munabadha. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 712: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet forbade Ishtimal-as-Samma' and that a man should sit in an Ihtiba'
     posture in one garment, nothing of which covers his private parts. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 713: 

     Narrated Um Khalid bint Khalid: 

     The Prophet was given some clothes including a black Khamisa. The Prophet said,
     "To whom shall we give this to wear?" The people kept silent whereupon the
     Prophet said, "Fetch Um Khalid for me." I (Um Khalid) was brought carried (as I
     was small girl at that time). The Prophet took the Khamisa in his hands and made
     me wear it and said, "May you live so long that your dress will wear out and you
     will mend it many times." On the Khamisa there were some green or pale designs
     (The Prophet saw these designs) and said, "O Um Khalid! This is Sanah." (Sanah
     in a Ethiopian word meaning beautiful). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 714: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When Um Sulaim gave birth to a child. she said to me, "O Anas! Watch this boy
     carefully and do not give him anything to eat or drink until you have taken him to
     the Prophet tomorrow morning for the Tahnik." So the next morning I took the
     child to the Prophet who was sitting in a garden and was wearing a Huraithiya
     Khamisa and was branding the she-camel on which he had come during the
     Conquest of Mecca. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 715: 

     Narrated 'Ikrima: 

     Rifa'a divorced his wife whereupon 'AbdurRahman bin Az-Zubair Al-Qurazi
     married her. 'Aisha said that the lady (came), wearing a green veil (and complained
     to her (Aisha) of her husband and showed her a green spot on her skin caused by
     beating). It was the habit of ladies to support each other, so when Allah's Apostle
     came, 'Aisha said, "I have not seen any woman suffering as much as the believing
     women. Look! Her skin is greener than her clothes!" When 'AbdurRahman heard
     that his wife had gone to the Prophet, he came with his two sons from another
     wife. She said, "By Allah! I have done no wrong to him but he is impotent and is as
     useless to me as this," holding and showing the fringe of her garment,
     'Abdur-Rahman said, "By Allah, O Allah's Apostle! She has told a lie! I am very
     strong and can satisfy her but she is disobedient and wants to go back to Rifa'a."
     Allah's Apostle said, to her, "If that is your intention, then know that it is unlawful
     for you to remarry Rifa'a unless Abdur-Rahman has had sexual intercourse with
     you." Then the Prophet saw two boys with 'Abdur-Rahman and asked (him), "Are
     these your sons?" On that 'AbdurRahman said, "Yes." The Prophet said, "You
     claim what you claim (i.e.. that he is impotent)? But by Allah, these boys resemble
     him as a crow resembles a crow," 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 716: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     On the day of the battle of Uhud, on the right and on the left of the Prophet were
     two men wearing white clothes, and I had neither seen them before, nor did I see
     them afterwards. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 717: 

     Narrated Abu Dharr: 

     I came to the Prophet while he was wearing white clothes and sleeping. Then I
     went back to him again after he had got up from his sleep. He said, "Nobody says:
     'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah' and then later on he dies while
     believing in that, except that he will enter Paradise.' I said, "Even It he had
     committed illegal sexual intercourse and theft." I said. "Even if he had committed
     illegal sexual intercourse and theft? He said. 'Even If he had committed illegal
     sexual intercourse and theft," I said, 'Even it he had committed illegal sexual
     intercourse and thefts.' He said, "Even If he had committed Illegal sexual
     intercourse and theft, inspite of the Abu Dharrs dislikeness. Abu 'Abdullah said,
     "This is at the time of death or before it if one repents and regrets and says "None
     has the right to be worshipped but Allah. He will be forgiven his sins." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 718: 

     Narrated Aba 'Uthman An-Nahdi: 

     While we were with 'Utba bin Farqad at Adharbijan, there came 'Umar's letter
     indicating that Allah's Apostle had forbidden the use of silk except this much, then
     he pointed with his index and middle fingers. To our knowledge, by that he meant
     embroidery. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 719: 

     Narrated Abu 'Uthman: 

     While we were at Adharbijan, 'Umar wrote to us: 'Allah's Apostle forbade wearing
     silk except this much. Then the Prophet approximated his two fingers (index and
     middle fingers) (to illustrate that) to us.' Zuhair (the sub-narrator) raised up his
     middle and index fingers. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 720: 

     Narrated Abu 'Uthman: 

     While we were with 'Utba. 'Umar wrote to us: The Prophet said, "There is none
     who wears silk in this world except that he will wear nothing of it in the Hereafter."
     ' Abu 'Uthman pointed out with his middle and index fingers. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 721: 

     Narrated Abu Uthman: 

     (as above, 719) 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 722: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Laila: 

     While Hudhaifa was at Al-Madain, he asked for water whereupon the chief of the
     village brought him water in a silver cup. Hudhaifa threw it at him and said, "I have
     thrown it only because I have forbidden him to use it, but he does not stop using it.
     Allah's Apostle said, 'Gold, silver, silk and Dibaj (a kind of silk) are for them
     (unbelievers) in this world and for you (Muslims) in the hereafter.' 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 723: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, Whoever wears silk in this world shall not wear it in the
     Hereafter." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 724: 

     Narrated Thabit: 

     I heard Ibn Az-Zubair delivering a sermon, saying, "Muhammad said, 'Whoever
     wears silk in this world, shall not wear it in the Hereafter." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 725: 

     Narrated Ibn Az-Zubair: 

     I heard 'Umar saying, "The Prophet said, 'Whoever wears silk in this world, shall
     not wear it in the Hereafter." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 726: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "None wears silk in this world, but he who will have no share
     in the Hereafter." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 727: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The Prophet was given a silk garment as a gift and we started touching it with our
     hands and admiring it. On that the Prophet said, "Do you wonder at this?" We
     said, "Yes." He said, "The handkerchiefs of Sad bin Mu'adh in Paradise are better
     than this " 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 728: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     The Prophet forbade us to drink out of gold and silver vessels, or eat in it, Ann
     also forbade the wearing of silk and Dibaj or sitting on it. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 729: 

     Narrated Ibn Azib: 

     The Prophet forbade us to use the red Mayathir and to use Al-Qassiy 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 730: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet allowed Az-Zubair and 'Abdur-Rahman to wear silk because they
     were suffering from an itch 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 731: 

     Narrated Ali bin Abi Talib: 

     The Prophet gave me a silk suit. I went out wearing it, but seeing the signs of anger
     on his face, I tore it and distributed it among my wives. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 732: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     'Umar saw a silk suit being sold, so he said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why don't you
     buy it so that you may wear it when delegates come to you, and also on Fridays?"
     The Prophet said, "This is worn only by him who has no share in the Hereafter."
     Afterwards the Prophet sent to 'Umar a silk suit suitable for wearing. 'Umar said to
     the Prophet, "You have given it to me to wear, yet I have heard you saying about it
     what you said?" The Prophet said, "I sent it to you so that you might either sell it or
     give it to somebody else to wear." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 733: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     that he had seen Um Kulthum, the daughter of Allah's Apostle , wearing a red silk
     garment. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 734: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     For one year I wanted to ask 'Umar about the two women who helped each other
     against the Prophet but I was afraid of him. One day he dismounted his riding
     animal and went among the trees of Arak to answer the call of nature, and when he
     returned, I asked him and he said, "(They were) 'Aisha and Hafsa." Then he
     added, "We never used to give significance to ladies in the days of the Pre-lslamic
     period of ignorance, but when Islam came and Allah mentioned their rights, we
     used to give them their rights but did not allow them to interfere in our affairs. Once
     there was some dispute between me and my wife and she answered me back in a
     loud voice. I said to her, 'Strange! You can retort in this way?' She said, 'Yes. Do
     you say this to me while your daughter troubles Allah's Apostle?' So I went to
     Hafsa and said to her, 'I warn you not to disobey Allah and His Apostle.' I first
     went to Hafsa and then to Um Salama and told her the same. She said to me, 'O
     'Umar! It surprises me that you interfere in our affairs so much that you would
     poke your nose even into the affairs of Allah's Apostle and his wives.' So she
     rejected my advice. There was an Ansari man; whenever he was absent from
     Allah's Apostle and I was present there, I used to convey to him what had
     happened (on that day), and when I was absent and he was present there, he used
     to convey to me what had happened as regards news from Allah's Apostle .
     During that time all the rulers of the nearby lands had surrendered to Allah's
     Apostle except the king of Ghassan in Sham, and we were afraid that he might
     attack us. All of a sudden the Ansari came and said, 'A great event has happened!'
     I asked him, 'What is it? Has the Ghassani (king) come?' He said, 'Greater than
     that! Allah's Apostle has divorced his wives! I went to them and found all of them
     weeping in their dwellings, and the Prophet had ascended to an upper room of his.
     At the door of the room there was a slave to whom I went and said, "Ask the
     permission for me to enter." He admitted me and I entered to see the Prophet lying
     on a mat that had left its imprint on his side. Under his head there was a leather
     pillow stuffed with palm fires. Behold! There were some hides hanging there and
     some grass for tanning. Then I mentioned what I had said to Hafsa and Um Salama
     and what reply Um Salama had given me. Allah's Apostle smiled and stayed there
     for twenty nine days and then came down." (See Hadith No. 648, Vol. 3 for
     details) 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 735: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     One night the Prophet woke up, saying, "None has the right to be worshipped but
     Allah! How many afflictions have been sent down tonight, and how many treasures
     have been sent down (disclosed)! Who will go and wake up (for prayers) the lady
     dwellers of these rooms? Many well dressed soul (people) in this world, will be
     naked on the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 736: 

     Narrated Um Khalid bint Khalid: 

     Some clothes were presented to Allah's Apostle as a gift and there was a black
     Khamisa with it. The Prophet asked (his companions), "To whom do you suggest
     we give this Khamisa?" The people kept quiet. Then he said, "Bring me Um
     Khalid," So I was brought to him and he dressed me with it with his own hands
     and said twice, "May you live so long that you will wear out many garments." He
     then started looking at the embroidery of that Khamisa and said, "O Um Khalid!
     This is Sana!" (Sana in Ethiopian language means beautiful.) Ishaq, a sub-narrator,
     said: A woman of my family had told me that she had seen the Khamisa worn by
     Um Khalid. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 737: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet forbade men to use saffron. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 738: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet forbade Muhrims to wear clothes dyed with Wars or saffron. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 739: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The Prophet was of a modest height. I saw him wearing a red suit, and I did not
     see anything better than him. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 740: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The Prophet ordered us to observe seven things: To visit the sick; follow funeral
     processions; say 'May Allah bestow His Mercy on you', to the sneezer if he says,
     'Praise be to Allah!; He forbade us to wear silk, Dibaj, Qassiy and Istibarq
     (various kinds of silken clothes); or to use red Mayathir (silk-cushions). (See
     Hadith No. 253 A, Vol. 8). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 741: 

     Narrated Said Abu Maslama: 

     I asked Anas (bin Malik), "Did the Prophet use to offer the prayers with his shoes
     on?" He said, "Yes." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 742: 

     Narrated Said Al-Maqburi: 

     'Ubai bin Juraij said to 'Abdullah Ben 'Umar, "I see you doing four things which are
     not done by your friends." Ibn 'Umar said, "What are they, O Ibn Juraij?" He said,
     "I see that you do not touch except the two Yemenite corners of the Ka'ba (while
     performing the Tawaf): and I see you wearing the Sabtiyya shoes; and I see you
     dyeing (your hair) with Sufra; and I see that when you are in Mecca, the people
     assume the state of Ihram on seeing the crescent (on the first day of Dhul-Hijja)
     while you do not assume the state of Ihram till the Day of Tarwiya (8th Dhul
     Hijja)." 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said to him, "As for the corners of the Ka'ba, I have
     not seen Allah's Apostle touching except the two Yemenite corners, As for the
     Sabtiyya shoes, I saw Allah's Apostle wearing leather shoes that had no hair, and
     he used to perform the ablution while wearing them. Therefore, I like to wear such
     shoes. As regards dyeing with Sufra, I saw Allah's Apostle dyeing his hair with it,
     so I like to dye (my hair) with it. As regards the crescent (of Dhul-Hijja), I have
     not seen Allah's Apostle assuming the state of Ihram till his she-camel set out (on
     the 8th of Dhul-Hijja)." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 743: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade that a Muhrim should wear clothes dyed with Saffron or
     Wars, and said, "Whoever has no shoes can put on Khuffs after cutting it below
     the ankles." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 744: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever has no Izar (waist sheet), can wear trousers; and
     whoever has no sandals, can wear Khuffs." (but cut them short below the ankles), 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 745: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to like starting from the right in performing ablution, combing his
     hair and putting on his shoes. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 746: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "None of you should walk, wearing one shoe only; he should
     either put on both shoes or put on no shoes whatsoever." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 747: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If you want to put on your shoes, put on the right shoe first;
     and if you want to take them off, take the left one first. Let the right shoe be the
     first to be put on and the last to be taken off." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 748: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The sandal of the Prophet had two straps. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 749: 

     Narrated Isaa bin Tahman: 

     Anas bin Malik brought out for us, two sandals having two straps. Thabit
     Al-Banani said, "These were the sandals of the Prophet ." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 750: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     I came to the Prophet while he was inside a red leather tent, and I saw Bilal taking
     the remaining water of the ablution of the Prophet, and the people were taking of
     that water and rubbing it on their faces; and whoever could not get anything of it,
     would share the moisture of the hand of his companion (and then rub it on his
     face). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 751: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet called for the Ansar and gathered them in a leather tent. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 752: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to construct a loom with a Hasir at night m order to pray therein,
     and during the day he used to spread it out and sit on it. The people started coming
     to the Prophet at night to offer the prayer behind him When their number
     increased, the Prophet faced them and said. O people! Do only those good deeds
     which you can do, for Allah does not get tired (of giving reward) till you get tired,
     and the best deeds to Allah are the incessant ones though they were few 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 753: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     The Prophet forbade us to use seven things: He forbade using gold rings, silk,
     Istabraq, Dibaj, red Mayathir, Al-Qassiy, and silver utensils. He ordered us to do
     seven other things. To pay a visit to the sick; to follow funeral processions; to say,
     "May Allah be merciful to you" to a sneezer if he says "Praise be to Allah"; to
     return greetings, to accept invitations; to help others to fulfil their oaths and to help
     the oppressed ones. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 754: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet forbade the wearing of a gold ring. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 755: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle wore a gold or silver .. ring and placed its stone towards the palm
     of his hand. The people also started wearing gold rings like it, but when the
     Prophet saw them wearing such rings, he threw away that golden ring and then
     wore a silver ring. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 756: 

     Narrated Ibn. 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle wore a gold ring or a silver ring and placed its stone towards the
     palm of his hand and had the name 'Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah' engraved on
     it. The people also started wearing gold rings like it, but when the Prophet saw
     them wearing such rings, he threw away his own ring and said. "I will never wear
     it," and then wore a silver ring, whereupon the people too started wearing silver
     rings. Ibn Umar added: After the Prophet Abu Bakr wore the ring, and then Umar
     and then 'Uthman wore it till it fell in the Aris well from 'Uthman. bin 'Umar : Allah's
     Apostle wore a gold ring, then he threw it and said, "I will never wear it." The
     people also threw their (gold) rings. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 757: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     that he saw a silver ring on the hand of Allah's Apostle for one day only. Then the
     people had silver rings made for themselves and wore it. On that, Allah's Apostle
     threw away their rings as well. (For the details of this Hadith, see Fateh-Al-Bari,
     Vol. 12, page 438). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 758: 

     Narrated Humaid: 

     Anas was asked, "Did the Prophet wear a ring?" Anas said, "Once he delayed the:
     'Isha' prayer till midnight. Then he came, facing us ..... as if l am now Looking at
     the glitter of his ring ..... and said, "The people have offered their prayers and slept
     but you have been in prayer as you have been waiting for it." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 759: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The ring of the Prophet was of silver, and its stone was of silver too. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 760: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     A woman came to the Prophet and said, "I have come to present myself to you
     (for marriage)." She kept standing for a long period during which period the
     Prophet looked at her carefully. When she stayed for a Long period, a man said to
     the Prophet "If you are not in need of her, then marry her to me." The Prophet
     said, "Have you got anything to give her (as Mahr)?" The man said, "No." The
     Prophet said, "Go (to your house) and search for something." The man went and
     came back to say, "By Allah, I could not find anything." The Prophet said, "Go
     again and search for something, even if it be an iron ring." He went again and came
     back saying, "No, by Allah, I could not get even an iron ring." The man had only an
     Izar and had no Rida' (upper garment). He said, "I will give her my Izar as Mahr."
     On that the Prophet said, "Your Izar? If she wears it, nothing of it will remain on
     you, and if you wear it nothing of it will be on her" The man went aside and sat
     down When the Prophet saw him leaving (after a while), he called back and asked.
     "How much Qur'an do you know (by heart)? He said, 'I know such and such
     Suras," naming some Suras. The Prophet said, "I marry her to you for the amount
     of Qur'an you know (by heart)." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 761: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle wanted to write a letter to a group of people or some non-Arabs.
     It was said to him, "They do not accept any letter unless it is stamped." So the
     Prophet had a silver ring made for himself, and on it was engraved: 'Muhammad,
     the Apostle of Allah'. .. as if I am now looking at the glitter of the ring on the finger
     (or in the palm) of the Prophet . 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 762: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle had a silver ring made for himself and it was worn by him on his
     hand. Afterwards it was worn by Abu Bakr, and then by 'Umar, and then by
     'Uthman till it fell in the Aris well. (On that ring) was engraved: 'Muhammad, the
     Apostle of Allah." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 763: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet got a ring made for himself and said, "I have got a ring made (for
     myself) and engraved a certain engraving on it so none of you should get such an
     engraving on his ring." I saw the glitter of the ring on his little finger. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 764: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     When the Prophet intended to write to the Byzantines, it was said to him, "Those
     people do not read your letter unless it is stamped." So the Prophet took a silver
     ring and got 'Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah' engraved on it .... as if I am now
     looking at its glitter in his hand. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 765: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     The Prophet had a golden ring made for himself, and when he wore it. he used to
     turn its stone toward the palm of his! hand. So the people too had gold made for
     themselves. The Prophet then ascended the pulpit, and after glorifying and praising
     Allah, he said, "I had it made for me, but now I will never wear it again." He threw
     it away, and then the people threw away their rings too. (Juwairiya, a sub-narrator,
     said: I think Anas said that the Prophet was wearing the ring in his right hand.) 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 766: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik : 

     Allah's Apostle took a silver ring and had 'Muhammad, the Apostle' of Allah'
     engraved on it. The Prophet then said (to us), 'I have a silver ring with
     'Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah engraved on it, so none of you should have the
     same engraving on his ring." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 767: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     that when Abu Bakr became the Caliph, he wrote a letter to him (and stamped it
     with the Prophet's ring) and the engraving of the ring was in three lines: Muhammad
     in one line, 'Apostle' in another line, and 'Allah' in a third line. Anas added: 'the ring
     of the Prophet was in his hand, and after him, in Abu Bakr's hand, and then in
     'Umar's hand after Abu Bakr. When Uthman was the Caliph, once he was sitting at
     the well of Aris. He removed the ring from his hand and while he was trifling with it,
     dropped into the well. We kept on going to the well with Uthman for three days
     looking for the ring, and finally the well was drained, but the ring was not found. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 768: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     I offered the 'Id prayer with the Prophet and he offered prayer before the Khutba
     (sermon). ibn 'Abbas added: After the prayer the Prophet came towards (the rows
     of) the women and ordered them to give alms, and the women started putting their
     big and small rings in the garment of Bilal. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 769: 

     Narrated ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet came out on the day of 'Id and offered a two-Rak'at prayer, and he
     did not pray any Rak'a before it, nor after it. Then he went towards the women
     and ordered them to give alms. The women started donating their earring and
     necklaces. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 770: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     A necklace belonging to Asma' was lost, and the Prophet sent men in its search.
     The time for the prayer became due and they were without ablution and they could
     not find water; therefore they prayed without ablution, They mentioned that to the
     Prophet . Then Allah revealed the Verse of Tayammum. ('Aisha added: that she
     had borrowed (the necklace) from Asma'). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 771: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas 

     "The Prophet offered a two-Rak'at prayer on 'Id day and he did not offer any
     (Nawafil prayer) before or after it. He then went towards the women, and Bilal
     was accompanying him, and ordered them to give alms. And so the women started
     giving their earrings (etc .)." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 772: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I was with Allah's Apostle in one of the Markets of Medina. He left (the market)
     and so did I. Then he asked thrice, "Where is the small (child)?" Then he said,
     "Call Al-Hasan bin 'Ali." So Al-Hasan bin 'Ali got up and started walking with a
     necklace (of beads) around his neck. The Prophet stretched his hand out like this,
     and Al-Hasan did the same. The Prophet embraced him and said, "0 Allah! l love
     him, so please love him and love those who love him." Since Allah's Apostle said
     that. nothing has been dearer to me than Al-Hasan. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 773: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle cursed those men who are in the similitude (assume the manners) of
     women and those women who are in the similitude (assume the manners) of men. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 774: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet cursed effeminate men (those men who are in the similitude (assume
     the manners of women) and those women who assume the manners of men, and he
     said, "Turn them out of your houses ." The Prophet turned out such-and-such man,
     and 'Umar turned out such-and-such woman. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 775: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     that once the Prophet was in her house, and an effeminate man was there too. The
     effeminate man said to 'Abdullah, (Um Salama's brother) "0 'Abdullah! If Ta'if
     should be conquered tomorrow, I recommend you the daughter of Ghailan, for she
     is so fat that she has four curves in the front (of her belly) and eight at the back."
     So the Prophet said (to his wives) "These effeminate (men) should not enter upon
     you (your houses). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 776: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "To get the moustaches cut 'short is characteristic of the Fitra." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 777: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Five practices are characteristics of the Fitra: circumcision,
     shaving the pubic region, clipping the nails and cutting the moustaches short." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 778: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "To shave the pubic hair. to clip the nails and to cut the
     moustaches short, are characteristics of the Fitra." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 779: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     I heard the Prophet saying. "Five practices are characteristics of the Fitra:
     circumcision, shaving the pubic hair, cutting the moustaches short, clipping the nails,
     and depilating the hair of the armpits." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 780: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Ibn Umar said, The Prophet said, 'Do the opposite of what the pagans do. Keep
     the beards and cut the moustaches short.' Whenever Ibn 'Umar performed the Hajj
     or 'Umra, he used to hold his beard with his hand and cut whatever moustaches.
     Ibn Umar used to cut his moustache so short that the whiteness of his skin (above
     the upper lip) was visible, and he used to cut (the hair) between his moustaches
     and his beard. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 781: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Cut the moustaches short and leave the beard (as it is)." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 782: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin: 

     I asked Anas, "Did the Prophet dye his hair?" Anas replied, "The Prophet did not
     have except a few grey hairs." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 783: 

     Narrated Thabit: 

     Anas was asked whether the Prophet used a a hair dye or not. Anas replied, "The
     Prophet had not enough grey hair to dye. I could even count the white grey hairs
     oil his beard ill would." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 784: 

     Narrated IsraiI: 

     Uthman bin 'Abdullah bin Mauhab said, "My people sent me with a bowl of water
     to Um Salama." Isra'il approximated three fingers ('indicating the small size of the
     container in which there was some hair of the Prophet. 'Uthman added, "If any
     person suffered from evil eye or some other disease, he would send a vessel
     (containing water) to Um Salama. I looked into the container (that held the hair of
     the Prophet) and saw a few red hairs in it," 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 785: 

     Narrated Uthman bin 'Abdullah bin Mauhab: 

     I went to Um Salama and she brought out for us some of the dyed hair of the
     Prophet . ibn Mauhab also said that Um Salama had shown him the red hair of the 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 786: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     The Prophet said, "Jews and Christians do not dye their hair so you should do the
     opposite of what they do. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 787: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet was neither conspicuously tall, nor short; neither, very white, nor
     tawny. His hair was neither much curled, nor very straight. Allah sent him (as an
     Apostle) at the age of forty (and after that) he stayed for ten years in Mecca, and
     for ten more years in Medina. Allah took him unto Him at the age of sixty, and he
     scarcely had ten white hairs on his head and in his beard. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 788: 

     Narrated Al-Bara': 

     I did not see anybody in a red cloak looking more handsome than the Prophet
     Narrated Malik: The hair of the Prophet used to hang near his shoulders. Narrated
     Shu'ba: The hair of the Prophet used to hang down to the earlobes. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 789: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Today I saw myself in a dream near the Ka'ba. I saw a
     whitish brown man, the handsomest of all brown men you might ever see. He had
     the most beautiful Limma (hair hanging down to the earlobes) you might ever see.
     He had combed it and it was dripping water; and he was performing the Tawaf
     around the Kaba leaning on two men or on the shoulders of two men. l asked,
     "Who is this?" It was said. "Messiah, the son of Mary." Suddenly I saw a
     curly-haired man, blind in the right eye which looked like a protruding out grape. I
     asked, "Who is this?" It was said, "He is Masiah Ad-Dajjal." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 790a: 

     Narrated Anas : 

     The hair of the Prophet used to hang down up to his shoulders. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 790b: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The head-hair of the Prophet used to hang down to his shoulders. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 791: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     l asked Anas bin Malik about the hair of Allah's Apostle. He said, "The hair of
     Allah's Apostle was neither much straight, nor much curly, and it used to hang
     down till between his shoulders and his earlobes. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 792: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet had big hands, and I have never seen anybody like him after him. The
     hair of the Prophet was wavy, neither curly nor straight. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 793: 

     Narrated Anas : 

     The Prophet had big hands and feet, and I have not seen anybody like him, neither
     before nor after him, and his palms were soft. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 794: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     The Prophet had big feet and a good-looking face and l have not seen anybody
     like him after him. Narrated Anas: The Prophet had big feet and hands. Narrated
     Anas or Jabir bin 'Abdullah The Prophet had big hands and feet and I have not
     seen anybody like him after him. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 795: 

     Narrated Mujahid: 

     We were with Ibn 'Abbas and the people mentioned Ad-Dajjal. Someone said,
     "The word 'Kafir' (unbeliever) is written in between his (Ad-Dajjal's) eyes." Ibn
     'Abbas said, "I have not heard the Prophet saying this, but he said, 'As regards
     Abraham, he looks like your companion (i.e. the Prophet, Muhammad), and as
     regards Moses, he is a brown curly haired man riding a camel and reigned with a
     strong jute rope, as if lam now looking at him getting down in the valley and saying,
     "Labbaik".'" 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 796: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar : 

     I heard 'Umar saying, "Whoever braids his hair should shave it (on finishing lhram).
     You'd better not do, something like Talbid." Ibn Umar used to say: "I saw Allah's
     Apostle with his hair stuck together with gum." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 797: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle, while he was in the state of lhram and his hair was stuck
     together with gum, saying, "Labbaik, Allahumma Labbaik, Labbaik La Shanka
     laka Labbaik. Inn-al-Hamda Wan-Ni'mata Laka wal-Mulk, La Shanka Lak." He
     did not add anything to those words. (See Hadith No. 621, Vol. 2) 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 798: 

     Narrated Hafsa: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why have the people finished
     their Ihram after performing the 'Umra while you have not finished your lhram after
     your 'Umra?" He said, "I have done Talbid (of my hair) and have decorated my
     Hadis with garlands, so I shall not finish my lhram till l have slaughtered my Hadi
     (animal for sacrifice)." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 799: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet used to copy the people of the Scriptures in matters in which there
     was no order from Allah. The people of the Scripture used to let their hair hang
     down while the pagans used to part their hair. So the Prophet let his hair hang
     down first, but later on he parted it. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 800: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     As if I am now looking at the shine of the hair parting of the Prophet while he was
     in the state of lhram. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 801: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas : 

     Once I stayed overnight in the house of my aunt Maimuna bint Al-Harith and
     Allah's Apostle was with her as it was her turn. Allah's Apostle got up to offer the
     night prayer. I stood on his left but he took hold of my two locks of hair and made
     me stand on his right. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 802: 

     Narrated Abu Bishr 

     (the above Hadith) but he quoted: Ibn 'Abbas said, (took hold of) my two braids
     on my head." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 803: 

     Narrated Ubaidullah bin Hafs: 

     that 'Umar bin Nafi' told him that Nafi', Maula 'Abdullah had heard 'Umar saying,
     "I heard Allah's Apostle forbidding Al-Qaza'." 'Ubaidullah added: I said, "What is
     Al-Qaza'?" 'Ubaidullah pointed (towards his head) to show us and added, "Nafi'
     said, 'It is when a boy has his head shaved leaving a tuft of hair here and a tuft of
     hair there." Ubaidullah pointed towards his forehead and the sides of his head.
     'Ubaidullah was asked, "Does this apply to both girls and boys?" He said, "I don't
     know, but Nafi' said, 'The boy.'" 'Ubaidullah added, "I asked Nafi' again, and he
     said, 'As for leaving hair on the temples and the back part of the boy's head, there
     is no harm, but Al-Qaza' is to leave a tuft of hair on his forehead unshaved while
     there is no hair on the rest of his head, and also to leave hair on either side of his
     head.'" 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 804: 

     Narrated (Abdullah) bin 'Umar : 

     Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Qaza' (leaving a tuft of hair here and there after shaving
     one's head.) 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 805: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     I applied perfume to the Prophet with my own hands when he wanted to assume
     the state of Ihram, and I also perfumed him at Mina before he departed from there
     (to perform Tawaf-al-Ifada). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 806: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     I used to perfume Allah's Apostle with the best scent available till I saw the shine of
     the scent on his head and shine beard. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 807: 

     Narrated Sa'd: 

     A man peeped into the house of the Prophet through a hole while the Prophet was
     scratching his head with a Midrai (a certain kind of comb). On that the Prophet
     said (to him), "If I had known you had been looking, then I would have pierced
     your eye with that instrument, because the asking of permission has been ordained
     so that one would not see things unlawfully." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 808: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     I used to comb the hair of Allah's Apostle during my periods. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 809: 

     Narrated 'Aisha 

     (As above, (808). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 810: 

     'Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to like to start from the right side as far as possible in combing
     and in performing ablution. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 811: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     The Prophet said, "(Allah said), 'Every good deed of Adam's son is for him except
     fasting; it is for Me. and I shall reward (the fasting person) for it.' Verily, the smell
     of the mouth of a fasting person is better to Allah than the smell of musk." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 812: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     used to perfume the Prophet before his assuming the state of with the best scent
     available. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 813: 

     Narrated Thumama bin 'Abdullah; 

     Anas never used to refuse (a gift of) scent and used to say that the Prophet never
     used to refuse (a gift of) scent. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 814: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     During Hajjat-al-Wada', I perfumed Allah's Apostle with Dharira with my own
     hands, both on his assuming Ihram and on finishing it. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 815: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     Allah has cursed those women who practise tattooing and those who get
     themselves tattooed, and those who remove their face hairs, and those who create
     a space between their teeth artificially to look beautiful, and such women as change
     the features created by Allah. Why then should I not curse those whom the
     Prophet has cursed? And that is in Allah's Book. i.e. His Saying: 'And what the
     Apostle gives you take it and what he forbids you abstain (from it).' (59.7) 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 816: 

     Narrated Humaid bin 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf 

     that in the year he performed Hajj. he heard Mu'awiya bin Abi Sufyan, who was
     on the pulpit and was taking a tuft of hair from one of his guards, saying, "Where
     are your religious learned men? I heard Allah's Apostle forbidding this (false hair)
     and saying, 'The children of Israel were destroyed when their women started using
     this.'" Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "Allah has cursed the lady who
     artificially lengthens (her or someone else's) hair and the one who gets her hair
     lengthened and the One who tattoos (herself or someone else) and the one who
     gets herself tattooed" 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 817: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     An Ansari girl was married and she became sick and all her hair fell out intending
     to provide her with false hair. They asked the Prophet who said, "Allah has cursed
     the lady who artificially lengthens (her or someone else's) hair and also the one who
     gets her hair lengthened." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 818: 

     Narrated Asma: 

     (the daughter of Abu' Bakr) A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, "I
     married my daughter to someone, but she became sick and all her hair fell out, and
     (because of that) her husband does not like her. May I let her use false hair?" On
     that the Prophet cursed such a lady as artificially lengthening (her or someone
     else's) hair or got her hair lengthened artificially. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 819: 

     Narrated Asma' 

     (the daughter of Abu Bakr) Allah's Apostle has cursed such a lady as artificially
     lengthening (her or someone else's) hair or gets her hair lengthened. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 820: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Allah has cursed such a lady as lengthens (her or someone
     else's) hair artificially or gets it lengthened, and also a lady who tattoos (herself or
     someone else) or gets herself tattooed. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 821: 

     Narrated Sa'id bin Al-Musaiyab: 

     Mu'awiya came to Medina for the last time and delivered a sermon. He took out a
     tuft of hair and said, "I thought that none used to do this (i.e. use false hair) except
     Jews. The Prophet labelled such practice, (i.e. the use of false hair), as cheating. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 822: 

     Narrated 'Alqama: 

     'Abdullah cursed those women who practiced tattooing and those who removed
     hair from their faces and those who created spaces between their teeth artificially
     to look beautiful, such ladies as changed what Allah has created. Um Ya'qub said,
     "What is that?" 'Abdullah said, "Why should I not curse those who were cursed by
     Allah's Apostle and are referred to in Allah's Book?" She said to him "By Allah, I
     have read the whole Qur'an but I have not found such a thing. 'Abdullah said, "By
     Allah, if you had read it (carefully) you would have found it. (Allah says:) 'And
     what the Apostle gives you take it and what he forbids you abstain (from it).'
     (59.7) 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 823: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar : 

     The Prophet has cursed the lady who lengthens her hair artificially and the one who
     gets her hair lengthened, and also the lady who tattoos (herself or others) and the
     one who gets herself tattooed. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 824: 

     Narrated Asma': 

     A woman asked the Prophet saying, "0 Allah's Apostle! My daughter got measles
     and her hair fell out. Now that I got her married, may I let her use false hair?" He
     said (to her), "Allah has cursed the lady who lengthens hair artificially and the one
     who gets her hair lengthened artificially." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 825: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar : 

     I heard the Prophet saying, (or the Prophet said), "Allah has cursed the lady who
     practices tattooing and that who gets it done for herself, and also the lady who
     lengthens hair artificially and that who gets her hair lengthened artificially." The
     Prophet has cursed such ladies. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 826: 

     Narrated Ibn Mas'ud: 

     Allah has cursed those women who practise tattooing or get it done for themselves,
     and those who remove hair from their faces, and those who create spaces between
     their teeth artificially to look beautiful, such ladies as change the features created by
     Allah. Why then shall I not curse those whom Allah's Apostle has cursed and who
     are cursed in Allah's Book too? 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 827: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The evil eye is a fact," and he forbade tattooing. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 828: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     (As above 827). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 829: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     The Prophet forbade the use of the price of blood and the price of a dog, the one
     who takes (eats) usury the one who gives usury, the woman who practises
     tattooing and the woman who gets herself tattooed. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 830: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     A woman who used to practise tattooing was brought to 'Umar. 'Umar got up and
     said, "I beseech you by Allah, which of you heard the Prophet saying something
     about tattooing?" l got up and said, "0 chief of the Believers! l heard something."
     He said, "What did you hear?" I said, "I heard the Prophet (addressing the ladies),
     saying, 'Do not practise tattooing and do not get yourselves tattooed.'" 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 831: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar : 

     The Prophet has cursed the lady who lengthens hair artificially and that who gets
     her hair lengthened in such away, and the lady who practises tattooing and that
     who gets it done for herself. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 832: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah : 

     Allah has cursed those women who practise tattooing and those who get it done
     for themselves, and those who remove hair from their faces, and those who
     artificially create spaces between their teeth to look beautiful, such women as alter
     the features created by Allah. Why should I not then curse those whom Allah's
     Apostle has cursed and that is in Allah's Book? 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 833: 

     Narrated Abu Talha : 

     The Prophet said, "Angels do not enter a house in which there is a dog or there are
     pictures." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 834: 

     Narrated Muslim: 

     We were with Masruq at the house of Yasar bin Numair. Masruq saw pictures on
     his terrace and said, "I heard 'Abdullah saying that he heard the Prophet saying,
     "The people who will receive the severest punishment from Allah will be the picture
     makers.'" 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 835: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar : 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Those who make these pictures will be punished on the Day
     of Resurrection, and it will be said to them. 'Make alive what you have created.'" 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 836: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I never used to leave in the Prophet house anything carrying images or crosses but
     he obliterated it. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 837: 

     Narrated Abu Zur'a: 

     l entered a house in Medina with Abu Huraira, and he saw a man making pictures
     at the top of the house. Abu Huraira said, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying that Allah
     said, 'Who would be more unjust than the one who tries to create the like of My
     creatures? Let them create a grain: let them create a gnat.' "Abu Huraira then
     asked for a water container and washed his arms up to his armpits. I said, "0 Abu i
     Huraira! Is this something you have heard I from Allah's Apostle?" He said, "The
     limit for ablution is up to the place where the ornaments will reach on the Day of
     Resurrection.' 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 838: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle returned from a journey when I had placed a curtain of mine having
     pictures over (the door of) a chamber of mine. When Allah's Apostle saw it, he
     tore it and said, "The people who will receive the severest punishment on the Day
     of Resurrection will be those who try to make the like of Allah's creations." So we
     turned it (i.e., the curtain) into one or two cushions. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 839: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The Prophet returned from a journey when I had hung a thick curtain having
     pictures (in front of a door). He ordered me to remove it and I removed it. Aisha
     added: The Prophet and I used to take a bath from one container (of water). 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 840: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     I purchased a cushion with pictures on it. The Prophet (came and) stood at the
     door but did not enter. I said (to him), "I repent to Allah for what (the guilt) I have
     done." He said, "What is this cushion?" I said, "It is for you to sit on and recline
     on." He said, "The makers of these pictures will be punished on the Day of
     Resurrection and it will be said to them, 'Make alive what you have created.'
     Moreover, the angels do not enter a house where there are pictures.'" 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 841: 

     Narrated Abu Talha: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Angels (of mercy) do not enter a house where there are
     pictures.'" The sub-narrator Busr added: "Then Zaid fell ill and we paid him a visit.
     Behold! There was, hanging at his door, a curtain decorated with a picture. I said
     to 'Ubaidullah Al-Khaulani, the step son of Maimuna, the wife of the Prophet ,
     "Didn't Zaid tell us about the picture the day before yesterday?" 'Ubaidullah said,
     "Didn't you hear him saying: 'except a design in a garment'?" 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 842: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Aisha had a thick curtain (having pictures on it) and she screened the side of her i
     house with it. The Prophet said to her, "Remove it from my sight, for its pictures
     are still coming to my mind in my prayers." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 843: 

     Narrated Salim's father: 

     Once Gabriel promised to visit the Prophet but he delayed and the Prophet got
     worried about that. At last he came out and found Gabriel and complained to him
     of his grief (for his delay). Gabriel said to him, "We do not enter a place in which
     there is a picture or a dog." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 844: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) 

     I bought a cushion having pictures on it. When Allah's Apostle saw it, he stopped
     at the gate and did not enter. I noticed the signs of hatred (for that) on his face! I
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! I turn to Allah and His Apostle in repentance! What sin
     have I committed?" He said, "What about this cushion?" I said, 'I bought it for you
     to sit on and recline on." Allah's Apostle said, "The makers of these pictures will be
     punished (severely) on the Day of Resurrection and it will be said to them, 'Make
     alive what you have created.'" He added, "Angels do not enter a house in which
     there are pictures." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 845: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     that he had bought a slave whose profession was cupping. The Prophet forbade
     taking the price of blood and the price of a dog and the earnings of a prostitute,
     and cursed the one who took or gave (Riba') usury, and the lady who tattooed
     others or got herself tattooed, and the picture-maker. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 846: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     I heard Muhammad saying, "Whoever makes a picture in this world will be asked
     to put life into it on the Day of Resurrection, but he will not be able to do so." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 847: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     Allah's Apostle rode a donkey saddled with a saddle covered with a Fadakiyya
     velvet sheet, and he made me ride behind him. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 848: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     When the Prophet arrived at Mecca, the children of Bani 'Abdul Muttalib received
     him. He then mounted one of them in front of him and the other behind him. 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 849: 

     Narrated Aiyub: 

     The worst of three (persons riding one, animal) was mentioned in 'Ikrima's
     presence 'Ikrima said, "Ibn 'Abbas said, '(In the year of the conquest of Mecca)
     the Prophet came and mounted Qutham in front of him and Al-Fadl behind him, or
     Qutham behind him and Al-Fadl in front of him.' Now which of them was the
     worst off and which was the best?" 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 850: 

     Narrated Mu'adh bin Jabal 

     While I was riding behind the Prophet and between me and him and between me
     and him there was only the back of the saddle, he said, "0 Mu'adh!" I replied,
     "Labbaik, 0 Allah's Apostle, and Sa'daik!" he said, "Do you know what is Allah's
     right upon his slave?" I said, "Allah and His Apostle know best" He said "Allah's
     right upon his slaves is that they should worship Him alone and not worship
     anything else besides Him." Then he proceeded for a while and then said, "O
     Muadh bin Jabal!" I replied, "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle:, Sa'daik!' He said, "Do
     you know what is the right of the slaves upon Allah if they do that?" I replied,
     "Allah and His Apostle know best." He said, "The right of the slaves upon Allah is
     that He will not punish them (if they do that)." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 851: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik : 

     We were coming from Khaibar along with Allah's Apostle while l was riding
     behind Abu Talha and he was proceeding. While one of the wives of Allah's
     Apostle was riding behind Allah's Apostle, suddenly the foot of the camel Slipped
     and I said, "The woman!" and alighted (hurriedly). Allah's Apostle said, "She is
     your mother." Sol resaddled the she-camel and Allah's Apostle mounted it. When
     he approached or saw Medina, he said, "Ayibun, ta'ibun, 'abidun, li-Rabbina
     hami-dun." 


Volume 7, Book 72, Number 852: 

     Narrated 'Abbad bin Tamim's uncle: 

     I saw the Prophet lying-down in the mosque and placing one leg on the other. 




