
Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 51: 

      Wills and Testaments
              (Wasaayaa) 

Volume 4, Book 51, Number 1: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: Allah's Apostle
     said, "It is not permissible for any Muslim who
     has something to will to stay for two nights
     without having his last will and testament written
     and kept ready with him." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 2: 

     Narrated Amr bin Al-Harith: 

     (The brother of the wife of Allah's Apostle.
     Juwaira bint Al-Harith) When Allah's Apostle
     died, he did not leave any Dirham or Dinar (i.e.
     money), a slave or a slave woman or anything
     else except his white mule, his arms and a piece
     of land which he had given in charity . 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 3: 

     Narrated Talha bin Musarrif: 

     I asked 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa "Did the Prophet
     make a will?" He replied, "No," I asked him,
     "How is it then that the making of a will has been
     enjoined on people, (or that they are ordered to
     make a will)?" He replied, "The Prophet
     bequeathed Allah's Book (i.e. Quran)." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 4: 

     Narrated Al-Aswad: 

     In the presence of 'Aisha some people mentioned
     that the Prophet had appointed 'Ali by will as his
     successor. 'Aisha said, "When did he appoint him
     by will? Verily when he died he was resting
     against my chest (or said: in my lap) and he
     asked for a wash-basin and then collapsed while
     in that state, and I could not even perceive that
     he had died, so when did he appoint him by
     will?" 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 5: 

     Narrated Sad bin Abu Waqqas: 

     The Prophet came visiting me while I was (sick)
     in Mecca, ('Amir the sub-narrator said, and he
     disliked to die in the land, whence he had already
     migrated). He (i.e. the Prophet) said, "May Allah
     bestow His Mercy on Ibn Afra (Sad bin
     Khaula)." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! May I will
     all my property (in charity)?" He said, "No." I
     said, "Then may I will half of it?" He said, "No". I
     said, "One third?" He said: "Yes, one third, yet
     even one third is too much. It is better for you to
     leave your inheritors wealthy than to leave them
     poor begging others, and whatever you spend for
     Allah's sake will be considered as a charitable
     deed even the handful of food you put in your
     wife's mouth. Allah may lengthen your age so that
     some people may benefit by you, and some
     others be harmed by you." At that time Sad had
     only one daughter. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 6: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     I recommend that people reduce the proportion
     of what they bequeath by will to the fourth (of the
     whole legacy), for Allah's Apostle said,
     "One-third, yet even one third is too much." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 7: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     I fell sick and the Prophet paid me a visit. I said
     to him, "O Allah's Apostle! I invoke Allah that
     He may not let me expire in the land whence I
     migrated (i.e. Mecca)." He said, "May Allah give
     you health and let the people benefit by you." I
     said, "I want to will my property, and I have only
     one daughter and I want to will half of my
     property (to be given in charity)." He said," Half
     is too much." I said, "Then I will one third." He
     said, "One-third, yet even one-third is too much."
     (The narrator added, "So the people started to
     will one third of their property and that was
     Permitted for them.") 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 8: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Utba bin Abi Waqqas
     entrusted (his son) to his brother Sad bin Abi
     Waqqas saying, "The son of the slave-girl of
     Zam'a is my (illegal) son, take him into your
     custody." So during the year of the Conquest (of
     Mecca) Sad took the boy and said, "This is my
     brother's son whom my brother entrusted to me."
     'Abu bin Zam's got up and said, "He is my
     brother and the son of the slave girl of my father
     and was born on my father's bed." Then both of
     them came to Allah's Apostle and Sad said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! This is my brother's son whom
     my brother entrusted to me." 

     Then 'Abu bin Zam'a got up and said, "This is my
     brother and the son of the slave-girl of my
     father." Allah's Apostle said, "O Abu bin Zam'a!
     This boy is for you as the boy belongs to the bed
     (where he was born), and for the adulterer is the
     stone (i.e. deprivation)." Then the Prophet said to
     his wife Sauda bint Zam'a, "Screen yourself from
     this boy," when he saw the boy's resemblance to
     'Utba. Since then the boy did not see Sauda till
     he died. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 9: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     A Jew crushed the head of a girl between two
     stones. She was asked, "Who has done so to
     you, so-and-so? So-and-so?" Till the name of
     the Jew was mentioned, whereupon she nodded
     (in agreement). So the Jew was brought and was
     questioned till he confessed. The Prophet then
     ordered that his head be crushed with stones. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 10: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The custom (in old days) was that the property
     of the deceased would be inherited by his
     offspring; as for the parents (of the deceased),
     they would inherit by the will of the deceased.
     Then Allah cancelled from that custom whatever
     He wished and fixed for the male double the
     amount inherited by the female, and for each
     parent a sixth (of the whole legacy) and for the
     wife an eighth or a fourth and for the husband a
     half or a fourth. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 11: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man asked the Prophet, "O Allah's Apostle!
     What kind of charity is the best?" He replied. "To
     give in charity when you are healthy and greedy
     hoping to be wealthy and afraid of becoming
     poor. Don't delay giving in charity till the time
     when you are on the death bed when you say,
     'Give so much to so-and-so and so much to
     so-and so,' and at that time the property is not
     yours but it belongs to so-and-so (i.e. your
     inheritors)." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 12: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The signs of a hypocrite are
     three: Whenever he speaks he tells a lie;
     whenever he is entrusted he proves dishonest;
     whenever he promises he breaks his promise." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 13: 

     Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: Hakim bin Hizam
     said, "I asked Allah's Apostle for something, and
     he gave me, and I asked him again and he gave
     me and said, 'O Hakim! This wealth is green and
     sweet (i.e. as tempting as fruits), and whoever
     takes it with 

     The upper (i.e. giving) hand is better than the
     lower (i.e. taking) hand." Hakim added, "I said,
     O Allah's Apostle! By Him Who has sent you
     with the Truth I will never demand anything from
     anybody after you till I die." Afterwards Abu
     Bakr used to call Hakim to give him something
     but he refused to accept anything from him. Then
     'Umar called him to give him (something) but he
     refused. Then 'Umar said, "O Muslims! I offered
     to him (i.e. Hakim) his share which Allah has
     ordained for him from this booty and he refuses
     to take it." Thus Hakim did not ask anybody for
     anything after the Prophet, till he died--may Allah
     bestow His mercy upon him. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 14: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "All of you are
     guardians and responsible for your charges: the
     Ruler (i.e. Imam) is a guardian and responsible
     for his subjects; and a man is a guardian of his
     family and is responsible for his charges; and a
     lady is a guardian in the house of her husband
     and is responsible for her charge; and a servant is
     a guardian of the property of his master and is
     responsible for his charge." I think he also said,
     "And a man is a guardian of the property of his
     father." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 15: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said to Abu Talha, "I recommend
     that you divide (this garden) amongst your
     relatives." Abu Talha said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
     will do the same." So Abu Talha divided it
     among his relatives and cousins. 

     Ibn 'Abbes said, "When the Qur'anic Verse: 

     "Warn your nearest kinsmen." (26.214) 

     Was revealed, the Prophet started calling the
     various big families of Quraish, "O Bani Fihr! O
     Bani Adi!". 

     Abu Huraira said, "When the Verse: "Warn your
     nearest kinsmen" was revealed, the Prophet said
     (in a loud voice), "O people of Quraish!" 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 16: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     When Allah revealed the Verse: "Warn your
     nearest kinsmen," Allah's Apostle got up and
     said, "O people of Quraish (or said similar
     words)! Buy (i.e. save) yourselves (from the
     Hellfire) as I cannot save you from Allah's
     Punishment; O Bani Abd Manaf! I cannot save
     you from Allah's Punishment, O Safiya, the Aunt
     of Allah's Apostle! I cannot save you from
     Allah's Punishment; O Fatima bint Muhammad!
     Ask me anything from my wealth, but I cannot
     save you from Allah's Punishment." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 17: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet saw a man driving a Badana (i.e.
     camel for sacrifice) and said to him, "Ride on it."
     The man said, "O Allah's Apostle! It is a
     Bandana." (The Prophet repeated his order) and
     on the third or fourth time he said, "Ride it, (woe
     to you" or said: "May Allah be merciful to you)." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 18: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle saw a man driving a Badana and
     said to him, "Ride on it," and on the second or
     the third time he added, "Woe to you." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 19: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The mother of Sad bin 'Ubada died in his
     absence. He said, "O Allah's Apostle! My
     mother died in my absence; will it be of any
     benefit for her if I give Sadaqa on her behalf?"
     The Prophet said, "Yes," Sad said, "I make you
     a witness that I gave my garden called Al
     Makhraf in charity on her behalf." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 20: 

     Narrated Kab bin Malik: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! For the acceptance of
     my repentance I wish to give all my property in
     charity for Allah's sake through His Apostle ." He
     said, "It is better for you to keep some of the
     property for yourself." I said, "Then I will keep
     my share in Khaibar." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 21: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Some people claim that the order in the above
     Verse is cancelled, by Allah, it is not cancelled,
     but the people have stopped acting on it. There
     are two kinds of guardians (who are in charge of
     the inheritance): One is that who inherits; such a
     person should give (of what he inherits to the
     relatives, the orphans and the needy, etc.), the
     other is that who does not inherit (e.g. the
     guardian of the orphans): such a person should
     speak kindly and say (to those who are present
     at the time of distribution), "I can not give it to
     you (as the wealth belongs to the orphans)." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 22: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     A man said to the Prophet, "My mother died
     suddenly, and I think that if she could speak, she
     would have given in charity. May I give in charity
     on her behalf?" He said, "Yes! Give in charity on
     her behalf." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 23: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Sad bin Ubada consulted Allah's Apostle saying,
     "My mother died and she had an unfulfilled vow."
     The Prophet said, "Fulfill it on her behalf." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 24: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     That the mother of Sad bin Ubada the brother of
     Bani Saida died in Sad's absence, so he came to
     the Prophet saying, "O Allah's Apostle! My
     mother died in my absence, will it benefit her if I
     give in charity on her behalf?" The Prophet said,
     "Yes." Sad said, "I take you as my witness that I
     give my garden Al-Makhraf in charity on her
     behalf." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 25: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: 

     Urwa bin Az-Zubair said that he asked 'Aisha
     about the meaning of the Quranic Verse:-- 

     "And if you fear that you will not deal fairly with
     the orphan girls then marry (other) women of
     your choice." (4.2-3) 

     Aisha said, "It is about a female orphan under the
     guardianship of her guardian who is inclined
     towards her because of her beauty and wealth,
     and likes to marry her with a Mahr less than what
     is given to women of her standard. So they (i.e.
     guardians) were forbidden to marry the orphans
     unless they paid them a full appropriate Mahr
     (otherwise) they were ordered to marry other
     women instead of them. Later on the people
     asked Allah's Apostle about it. So Allah revealed
     the following Verse:-- 

     "They ask your instruction (O Muhammad!)
     regarding women. Say: Allah instructs you
     regarding them..." (4.127) 

     and in this Verse Allah indicated that if the
     orphan girl was beautiful and wealthy, her
     guardian would have the desire to marry her
     without giving her an appropriate Mahr equal to
     what her peers could get, but if she was
     undesirable for lack of beauty or wealth, then he
     would not marry her, but seek to marry some
     other woman instead of her. So, since he did not
     marry her when he had no inclination towards
     her, he had not the right to marry her when he
     had an interest in her, unless he treated her justly
     by giving her a full Mahr and securing all her
     rights. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 26: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     In the lifetime of Allah's Apostle , Umar gave in
     charity some of his property, a garden of
     date-palms called Thamgh. 'Umar said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I have some property which I
     prize highly and I want to give it in charity." The
     Prophet; said, "Give it in charity (i.e. as an
     endowment) with its land and trees on the
     condition that the land and trees will neither be
     sold nor given as a present, nor bequeathed, but
     the fruits are to be spent in charity." So 'Umar
     gave it in charity, and it was for Allah's Cause,
     the emancipation of slaves, for the poor, for
     guests, for travelers, and for kinsmen. The
     person acting as its administrator could eat from
     it reasonably and fairly, and could let a friend of
     his eat from it provided he had no intention of
     becoming wealthy by its means. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 27: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The following Verse:-- 

     "If a guardian is well-off, let him claim no
     remuneration (i.e. wages), but if he is poor, let
     him have for himself what is just and reasonable."
     (4.6) 

     was revealed in connection with the guardian of
     an orphan, and it means that if he is poor he can
     have for himself (from the orphan's wealth) what
     is just and reasonable according to the orphan's
     share of the inheritance. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 28: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Avoid the seven great
     destructive sins." The people enquire, "O Allah's
     Apostle! What are they? "He said, "To join
     others in worship along with Allah, to practice
     sorcery, to kill the life which Allah has forbidden
     except for a just cause, (according to Islamic
     law), to eat up Riba (usury), to eat up an
     orphan's wealth, to give back to the enemy and
     fleeing from the battlefield at the time of fighting,
     and to accuse, chaste women, who never even
     think of anything touching chastity and are good
     believers. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 29: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When Allah's Apostle came to Medina; he did
     not have any servant. Abu Talha (Anas'
     step-father) took me to Allah's Apostle and said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! Anas is a wise boy, so let
     him serve you." So, I served him at home and on
     journeys. If I did anything, he never asked me
     why I did it, and if I refrained from doing
     anything, he never asked me why I refrained
     from doing it. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 30: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Abu Talha had the greatest wealth of date-palms
     amongst the Ansar in Medina, and he prized
     above all his wealth (his garden) Bairuha', which
     was situated opposite the Mosque (of the
     Prophet ). The Prophet used to enter It and drink
     from its fresh water. When the following Divine
     Verse came:-- 

     "By no means shall you attain piety until you
     spend of what you love," (3.92) 

     Abu Talha got up saying. "O Allah's Apostle!
     Allah says, 'You will not attain piety until you
     spend of what you love,' and I prize above al I
     my wealth, Bairuha' which I want to give in
     charity for Allah's Sake, hoping for its reward
     from Allah. So you can use it as Allah directs
     you." On that the Prophet said, "Bravo! It is a
     profitable (or perishable) property. (Ibn
     Maslama is not sure as to which word is right,
     i.e. profitable or perishable.) I have heard what
     you have said, and I recommend that you
     distribute this amongst your relatives." On that
     Abu Talha said, "O Allah's Apostle! I will do (as
     you have suggested)." So, Abu Talha distributed
     that garden amongst his relatives and cousins. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 31: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     A man said to Allah's Apostle , "My mother
     died, will it benefit her if I give in charity on her
     behalf?" The Prophet replied in the affirmative.
     The man said, "I have a garden and I make you a
     witness that I give it in charity on her behalf." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 32: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When the Prophet ordered that the mosque be
     built, he said, "O Bani An-Najjar! Suggest to me
     a price for this garden of yours." They replied,
     "By Allah! We will demand its price from none
     but Allah." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 33: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     When 'Umar got a piece of land in Khaibar, he
     came to the Prophet saying, "I have got a piece
     of land, better than which I have never got. So
     what do you advise me regarding it?" The
     Prophet said, "If you wish you can keep it as an
     endowment to be used for charitable purposes."
     So, 'Umar gave the land in charity (i.e. as an
     endowments on the condition that the land would
     neither be sold nor given as a present, nor
     bequeathed, (and its yield) would be used for the
     poor, the kinsmen, the emancipation of slaves,
     Jihad, and for guests and travelers; and its
     administrator could eat in a reasonable just
     manner, and he also could feed his friends
     without intending to be wealthy by its means." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 34: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Umar got some property in Khaibar and he came
     to the Prophet and informed him about it. The
     Prophet said to him, "If you wish you can give it
     in charity." So 'Umar gave it in charity (i.e. as an
     endowment) the yield of which was to be used
     for the good of the poor, the needy, the kinsmen
     and the guests. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 35: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     When Allah's Apostle came to Medina, he
     ordered that a mosque be built. He said, "O Bani
     An-Najjar! Suggest me a price for the garden of
     yours." They replied, "By Allah, we will not ask
     its price except from Allah." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 36: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Once 'Umar gave a horse in charity to be used in
     holy fighting. It had been given to him by Allah's
     Apostle . 'Umar gave it to another man to ride.
     Then 'Umar was informed that the man put the
     horse for sale, so he asked Allah's Apostle
     whether he could buy it. Allah's Apostle replied,
     "You should not buy it, for you should not take
     back what you have given in charity." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 37: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "My heirs will not inherit a
     Dinar or a Dirham (i.e. money), for whatever I
     leave (excluding the adequate support of my
     wives and the wages of my employees) is given
     in charity." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 38: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     When 'Umar founded an endowment he
     stipulated that its administrator could eat from it
     and also feed his friend on the condition that he
     would not store anything for himself from it. 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 39: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said (at the time of building the
     Mosque), "O Ban, An-Najjar! Suggest to me a
     price for your garden." They replied, "We do not
     ask its price except from Allah." 


Volume 4, Book 51, Number 40: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari: 

     My father was martyred on the day (of the
     Ghazwa) of Uhud and left six daughters and
     some debts to be paid. When the time of
     plucking the date-fruits came, I went to Allah's
     Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! you know
     that my father was martyred on Uhud's day and
     owed much debt, and I wish that the creditors
     would see you." The Prophet said, "Go and
     collect the various kinds of dates and place them
     separately in heaps"' I did accordingly and called
     him. On seeing him, the creditors started claiming
     their rights pressingly at that time. When the
     Prophet saw how they behaved, he went round
     the biggest heap for three times and sat over it
     and said, "Call your companions (i.e. the
     creditors)." Then he kept on measuring and
     giving them, till Allah cleared all my father's
     debts. By Allah, it would have pleased me that
     Allah would clear the debts of my father even
     though I had not taken a single date to my sisters.
     But by Allah, all the heaps were complete, (as
     they were) and I looked at the heap where
     Allah's Apostle was sitting and noticed as if not a
     single date had been taken thereof. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 52: 

   Fighting for the Cause of
           Allah (Jihaad) 



Volume 4, Book 52, Number 41: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Masud: 

     I asked Allah's Apostle, "O Allah's Apostle!
     What is the best deed?" He replied, "To offer the
     prayers at their early stated fixed times." I asked,
     "What is next in goodness?" He replied, "To be
     good and dutiful to your parents." I further
     asked, what is next in goodness?" He replied,
     "To participate in Jihad in Allah's Cause." I did
     not ask Allah's Apostle anymore and if I had
     asked him more, he would have told me more. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 42: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There is no Hijra (i.e.
     migration) (from Mecca to Medina) after the
     Conquest (of Mecca), but Jihad and good
     intention remain; and if you are called (by the
     Muslim ruler) for fighting, go forth immediately. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 43: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (That she said), "O Allah's Apostle! We consider
     Jihad as the best deed. Should we not fight in
     Allah's Cause?" He said, "The best Jihad (for
     women) is Hajj-Mabrur (i.e. Hajj which is done
     according to the Prophet's tradition and is
     accepted by Allah)." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 44: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man came to Allah's Apostle and said,
     "Instruct me as to such a deed as equals Jihad (in
     reward)." He replied, "I do not find such a deed."
     Then he added, "Can you, while the Muslim
     fighter is in the battle-field, enter your mosque to
     perform prayers without cease and fast and
     never break your fast?" The man said, "But who
     can do that?" Abu- Huraira added, "The Mujahid
     (i.e. Muslim fighter) is rewarded even for the
     footsteps of his horse while it wanders bout (for
     grazing) tied in a long rope." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 45: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Somebody asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Who is
     the best among the people?" Allah's Apostle
     replied "A believer who strives his utmost in
     Allah's Cause with his life and property." They
     asked, "Who is next?" He replied, "A believer
     who stays in one of the mountain paths
     worshipping Allah and leaving the people secure
     from his mischief." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 46: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The example of a
     Mujahid in Allah's Cause-- and Allah knows
     better who really strives in His Cause----is like a
     person who fasts and prays continuously. Allah
     guarantees that He will admit the Mujahid in His
     Cause into Paradise if he is killed, otherwise He
     will return him to his home safely with rewards
     and war booty." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 47: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle used to visit Um Haran bint
     Milhan, who would offer him reals. Um-Haram
     was the wife of Ubada bin As-Samit. Allah's
     Apostle, once visited her and she provided him
     with food and started looking for lice in his head.
     Then Allah's Apostle slept, and afterwards woke
     up smiling. Um Haran asked, "What causes you
     to smile, O Allah's Apostle?" He said. "Some of
     my followers who (in a dream) were presented
     before me as fighters in Allah's Cause (on board
     a ship) amidst this sea cause me to smile; they
     were as kings on the thrones (or like kings on the
     thrones)." (Ishaq, a sub-narrator is not sure as to
     which expression the Prophet used.) Um-Haram
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah that he
     makes me one of them. Allah's Apostle invoked
     Allah for her and slept again and woke up
     smiling. Once again Um Haram asked, "What
     makes you smile, O Allah's Apostle?" He
     replied, "Some of my followers were presented
     to me as fighters in Allah's Cause," repeating the
     same dream. Um-Haram said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Invoke Allah that He makes me one of
     them." He said, "You are amongst the first ones."
     It happened that she sailed on the sea during the
     Caliphate of Mu'awlya bin Abi Sufyan, and after
     she disembarked, she fell down from her riding
     animal and died. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 48: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever believes in Allah
     and His Apostle, offer prayer perfectly and fasts
     the month of Ramadan, will rightfully be granted
     Paradise by Allah, no matter whether he fights in
     Allah's Cause or remains in the land where he is
     born." The people said, "O Allah's Apostle !
     Shall we acquaint the people with the is good
     news?" He said, "Paradise has one-hundred
     grades which Allah has reserved for the
     Mujahidin who fight in His Cause, and the
     distance between each of two grades is like the
     distance between the Heaven and the Earth. So,
     when you ask Allah (for something), ask for
     Al-firdaus which is the best and highest part of
     Paradise." (i.e. The sub-narrator added, "I think
     the Prophet also said, 'Above it (i.e. Al-Firdaus)
     is the Throne of Beneficent (i.e. Allah), and from
     it originate the rivers of Paradise.") 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 49: 

     Narrated Samura: 

     The Prophet said, "Last night two men came to
     me (in a dream) and made me ascend a tree and
     then admitted me into a better and superior
     house, better of which I have never seen. One of
     them said, 'This house is the house of martyrs." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 50: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "A single endeavor (of fighting)
     in Allah's Cause in the forenoon or in the
     afternoon is better than the world and whatever
     is in it." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 51: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A place in Paradise as small
     as a bow is better than all that on which the sun
     rises and sets (i.e. all the world)." He also said,
     "A single endeavor in Allah's Cause in the
     afternoon or in the forenoon is better than all that
     on which the sun rises and sets." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 52: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     The Prophet said, "A single endeavor in Allah's
     Cause in the afternoon and in the forenoon is
     better than the world and whatever is in it." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 53: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Nobody who dies and finds
     good from Allah (in the Hereafter) would wish to
     come back to this world even if he were given
     the whole world and whatever is in it, except the
     martyr who, on seeing the superiority of
     martyrdom, would like to come back to the
     world and get killed again (in Allah's Cause)." 

     Narrated Anas: The Prophet said, "A single
     endeavor (of fighting) in Allah's Cause in the
     afternoon or in the forenoon is better than all the
     world and whatever is in it. A place in Paradise
     as small as the bow or lash of one of you is
     better than all the world and whatever is in it.
     And if a houri from Paradise appeared to the
     people of the earth, she would fill the space
     between Heaven and the Earth with light and
     pleasant scent and her head cover is better than
     the world and whatever is in it." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 54: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "By Him in Whose Hands my
     life is! Were it not for some men amongst the
     believers who dislike to be left behind me and
     whom I cannot provide with means of
     conveyance, I would certainly never remain
     behind any Sariya' (army-unit) setting out in
     Allah's Cause. By Him in Whose Hands my life
     is! I would love to be martyred in Al1ah's Cause
     and then get resurrected and then get martyred,
     and then get resurrected again and then get
     martyred and then get resurrected again and then
     get martyred. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 55: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet delivered a sermon and said, "Zaid
     took the flag and was martyred, and then Ja'far
     took the flag and was martyred, and then
     'Abdullah bin Rawaha took the flag and was
     martyred too, and then Khalid bin Al-Walid took
     the flag though he was not appointed as a
     commander and Allah made him victorious." The
     Prophet further added, "It would not please us to
     have them with us." Aiyub, a sub-narrator,
     added, "Or the Prophet, shedding tears, said, 'It
     would not p ease them to be with us." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 56: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Um Haram said, "Once the Prophet slept in my
     house near to me and got up smiling. I said,
     'What makes you smile?' He replied, 'Some of
     my followers who (i.e. in a dream) were
     presented to me sailing on this green sea like
     kings on thrones.' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle!
     Invoke Allah to make me one of them." So the
     Prophet invoked Allah for her and went to sleep
     again. He did the same (i.e. got up and told his
     dream) and Um Haran repeated her question and
     he gave the same reply. She said, "Invoke Allah
     to make me one of them." He said, "You are
     among the first batch." Later on it happened that
     she went out in the company of her husband
     'Ubada bin As-Samit who went for Jihad and it
     was the first time the Muslims undertook a naval
     expedition led by Mu awiya. When the
     expedition came to an end and they were
     returning to Sham, a riding animal was presented
     to her to ride, but the animal let her fall and thus
     she died. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 57: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet sent seventy men from the tribe of
     Bani Salim to the tribe of Bani Amir. When they
     reached there, my maternal uncle said to them, "I
     will go ahead of you, and if they allow me to
     convey the message of Allah's Apostle (it will be
     all right); otherwise you will remain close to me."
     So he went ahead of them and the pagans
     granted him security But while he was reporting
     the message of the Prophet , they beckoned to
     one of their men who stabbed him to death. My
     maternal uncle said, "Allah is Greater! By the
     Lord of the Kaba, I am successful." After that
     they attached the rest of the party and killed them
     all except a lame man who went up to the top of
     the mountain. (Hammam, a sub-narrator said, "I
     think another man was saved along with him)."
     Gabriel informed the Prophet that they (i.e the
     martyrs) met their Lord, and He was pleased
     with them and made them pleased. We used to
     recite, "Inform our people that we have met our
     Lord, He is pleased with us and He has made us
     pleased " Later on this Quranic Verse was
     cancelled. The Prophet invoked Allah for forty
     days to curse the murderers from the tribe of Ral,
     Dhakwan, Bani Lihyan and Bam Usaiya who
     disobeyed Allah and his Apostle 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 58: 

     Narrated Jundab bin Sufyan: 

     In one of the holy Battles a finger of Allah's
     Apostle (got wounded and) bled. He said, "You
     are just a finger that bled, and what you got is in
     Allah's Cause." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 59: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hands
     my soul is! Whoever is wounded in Allah's
     Cause....and Allah knows well who gets
     wounded in His Cause....will come on the Day of
     Resurrection with his wound having the color of
     blood but the scent of musk." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 60: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Abbas: 

     That Abu Sufyan told him that Heraclius said to
     him, "I asked you about the outcome of your
     battles with him (i.e. the Prophet ) and you told
     me that you fought each other with alternate
     success. So the Apostles are tested in this way
     but the ultimate victory is always theirs. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 61: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     My uncle Anas bin An-Nadr was absent from
     the Battle of Badr. He said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
     was absent from the first battle you fought against
     the pagans. (By Allah) if Allah gives me a chance
     to fight the pagans, no doubt. Allah will see how
     (bravely) I will fight." On the day of Uhud when
     the Muslims turned their backs and fled, he said,
     "O Allah! I apologize to You for what these (i.e.
     his companions) have done, and I denounce
     what these (i.e. the pagans) have done." Then he
     advanced and Sad bin Muadh met him. He said
     "O Sad bin Muadh ! By the Lord of An-Nadr,
     Paradise! I am smelling its aroma coming from
     before (the mountain of) Uhud," Later on Sad
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! I cannot achieve or do
     what he (i.e. Anas bin An-Nadr) did. We found
     more than eighty wounds by swords and arrows
     on his body. We found him dead and his body
     was mutilated so badly that none except his sister
     could recognize him by his fingers." We used to
     think that the following Verse was revealed
     concerning him and other men of his sort:
     "Among the believers are men who have been
     true to their covenant with Allah.........." (33.23) 

     His sister Ar-Rubbaya' broke a front tooth of a
     woman and Allah's Apostle ordered for
     retaliation. On that Anas (bin An-Nadr) said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! By Him Who has sent you with
     the Truth, my sister's tooth shall not be broken."
     Then the opponents of Anas's sister accepted the
     compensation and gave up the claim of
     retaliation. So Allah's Apostle said, "There are
     some people amongst Allah's slaves whose oaths
     are fulfilled by Allah when they take them." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 62: 

     Narrated Kharija bin Zaid: 

     Zaid bin Thabit said, "When the Quran was
     compiled from various written manuscripts, one
     of the Verses of Surat Al-Ahzab was missing
     which I used to hear Allah's Apostle reciting. I
     could not find it except with Khuzaima bin Thabjt
     Al-Ansari, whose witness Allah's Apostle
     regarded as equal to the witness of two men.
     And the Verse was:-- "Among the believers are
     men who have been true to what they
     covenanted with Allah." (33.23) 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 63: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     A man whose face was covered with an iron
     mask (i.e. clad in armor) came to the Prophet
     and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I fight or
     embrace Islam first? "The Prophet said,
     "Embrace Islam first and then fight." So he
     embraced Islam, and was martyred. Allah's
     Apostle said, A Little work, but a great reward.
     "(He did very little (after embracing Islam), but
     he will be rewarded in abundance)." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 64: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Um Ar-Rubai'bint Al-Bara', the mother of
     Hartha bin Suraqa came to the Prophet and said,
     "O Allah's Prophet! Will you tell me about
     Hartha?" Hartha has been killed (i.e. martyred)
     on the day of Badr with an arrow thrown by an
     unidentified person. She added, "If he is in
     Paradise, I will be patient; otherwise, I will weep
     bitterly for him." He said, "O mother of Hartha!
     There are Gardens in Paradise and your son got
     the Firdausal-ala (i.e. the best place in
     Paradise)." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 65: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     A man came to the Prophet and asked, "A man
     fights for war booty; another fights for fame and
     a third fights for showing off; which of them fights
     in Allah's Cause?" The Prophet said, "He who
     fights that Allah's Word (i.e. Islam) should be
     superior, fights in Allah's Cause." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 66: 

     Narrated Abu Abs: 

     (who is 'Abdur-Rahman bin Jabir) Allah's
     Apostle said," Anyone whose both feet get
     covered with dust in Allah's Cause will not be
     touched by the (Hell) fire." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 67: 

     Narrated 'Ikrima: 

     that Ibn 'Abbas told him and 'Ali bin 'Abdullah to
     go to Abu Said and listen to some of his
     narrations; So they both went (and saw) Abu
     Said and his brother irrigating a garden belonging
     to them. When he saw them, he came up to them
     and sat down with his legs drawn up and
     wrapped in his garment and said, "(During the
     construction of the mosque of the Prophet) we
     carried the adobe of the mosque, one brick at a
     time while 'Ammar used to carry two at a time.
     The Prophet passed by 'Ammar and removed
     the dust off his head and said, "May Allah be
     merciful to 'Ammar. He will be killed by a
     rebellious aggressive group. 'Ammar will invite
     them to (obey) Allah and they will invite him to
     the (Hell) fire." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 68: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When Allah's Apostle returned on the day (of the
     battle) of Al-Khandaq (i.e. Trench), he put down
     his arms and took a bath. Then Gabriel whose
     head was covered with dust, came to him saying,
     "You have put down your arms! By Allah, I have
     not put down my arms yet." Allah's Apostle said,
     "Where (to go now)?" Gabriel said, "This way,"
     pointing towards the tribe of Bani Quraiza. So
     Allah's Apostle went out towards them . 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 69: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     For thirty days Allah's Apostle invoked Allah to
     curse those who had killed the companions of
     Bir-Mauna; he invoked evil upon the tribes of
     Ral, Dhakwan, and Usaiya who disobeyed Allah
     and His Apostle. There was reveled about those
     who were killed at Bir-Mauna a Quranic Verse
     we used to recite, but it was cancelled later on.
     The Verse was: 

     "Inform our people that we have met our Lord.
     He is pleased with us and He has made us
     pleased" 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 70: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     "Some people drank alcohol in the morning of
     the day (of the battle) of Uhud and were
     martyred (on the same day)." Sufyan was asked,
     "(Were they martyred) in the last part of the
     day?)" He replied, "Such information does not
     occur in the narration." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 71: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     My father's mutilated body was brought to the
     Prophet and was placed in front of him. I went to
     uncover his face but my companions forbade me.
     Then mourning cries of a lady were heard, and it
     was said that she was either the daughter or the
     sister of Amr. The Prophet said, "Why is she
     crying?" Or said, "Do not cry, for the angels are
     still shading him with their wings." (Al-Bukhari
     asked Sadqa, a sub-narrator, "Does the
     narration include the expression: 'Till he was
     lifted?' " The latter replied, "Jabir may have said
     it.") 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 72: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Nobody who enters Paradise
     likes to go back to the world even if he got
     everything on the earth, except a Mujahid who
     wishes to return to the world so that he may be
     martyred ten times because of the dignity he
     receives (from Allah)." 

     Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba: Our Prophet
     told us about the message of our Lord that
     "Whoever amongst us is killed will go to
     Paradise." Umar asked the Prophet, "Is it not
     true that our men who are killed will go to
     Paradise and their's (i.e. those of the Pagan's)
     will go to the (Hell) fire?" The Prophet said,
     "Yes." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 73: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Know that Paradise is
     under the shades of swords." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 74i: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Once Solomon, son of
     David said, '(By Allah) Tonight I will have sexual
     intercourse with one hundred (or ninety-nine)
     women each of whom will give birth to a knight
     who will fight in Allah's Cause.' On that a (i.e. if
     Allah wills) but he did not say, 'Allah willing.'
     Therefore only one of those women conceived
     and gave birth to a half-man. By Him in Whose
     Hands Muhammad's life is, if he had said, "Allah
     willing', (he would have begotten sons) all of
     whom would have been knights striving in Allah's
     Cause." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 74n: 

     Narrated Anas: The Prophet was the best, the
     bravest and the most generous of all the people.
     Once when the people of Medina got frightened,
     the Prophet rode a horse and went ahead of
     them and said, "We found this horse very fast." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 75: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Jubair: 

     Jubair bin Mut'im told me that while he was in the
     company of Allah's Apostle with the people
     returning from Hunain, some people (bedouins)
     caught hold of the Prophet and started begging of
     him so much so that he had to stand under a
     (kind of thorny tree (i.e. Samurah) and his cloak
     was snatched away. The Prophet stopped and
     said, "Give me my cloak. If I had as many camels
     as these thorny trees, I would have distributed
     them amongst you and you will not find me a
     miser or a liar or a coward." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 76: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun Al-Audi: 

     Sad used to teach his sons the following words
     as a teacher teaches his students the skill of
     writing and used to say that Allah's Apostle used
     to seek Refuge with Allah from them (i.e. the
     evils) at the end of every prayer. The words are: 

     'O Allah! I seek refuge with You from
     cowardice, and seek refuge with You from being
     brought back to a bad stage of old life and seek
     refuge with You from the afflictions of the world,
     and seek refuge with You from the punishments
     in the grave.' 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 77: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet used to say, "O Allah! I seek refuge
     with You from helplessness, laziness, cowardice
     and feeble old age; I seek refuge with You from
     afflictions of life and death and seek refuge with
     You from the punishment in the grave." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 78: 

     Narrated As-Sa'-ib bin Yazid: 

     I was in the company of Talha bin 'Ubaidullah,
     Sad, Al-Miqdad bin Al-Aswad and 'Abdur
     Rahman bin 'Auf and I heard none of them
     narrating anything from Allah's Apostle but Talha
     was talking about the day (of the battle) of Uhud.


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 79: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     On the day of the Conquest (of Mecca) the
     Prophet said, "There is no emigration after the
     Conquest but Jihad and intentions. When you are
     called (by the Muslim ruler) for fighting, go forth
     immediately." (See Hadith No. 42) 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 80i: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Allah welcomes two men
     with a smile; one of whom kills the other and
     both of them enter Paradise. One fights in Allah's
     Cause and gets killed. Later on Allah forgives the
     'killer who also get martyred (In Allah's Cause)." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 80n: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I went to Allah's Apostle while he was at
     Khaibar after it had fallen in the Muslims' hands.
     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Give me a share (from
     the land of Khaibar)." 

     One of the sons of Sa'id bin Al-'As said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Do not give him a share." I said,
     "This is the murderer of Ibn Qauqal." The son of
     Said bin Al-As said, "Strange! A Wabr (i.e.
     guinea pig) who has come down to us from the
     mountain of Qaduim (i.e. grazing place of sheep)
     blames me for killing a Muslim who was given
     superiority by Allah because of me, and Allah did
     not disgrace me at his hands (i.e. was not killed
     as an infidel)." (The sub-narrator said "I do not
     know whether the Prophet gave him a share or
     not.") 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 81: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik 

     In the life-time of the Prophet, Abu Talha did not
     fast because of the Jihad, but after the Prophet
     died I never saw him without fasting except on
     'Id-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Aclha. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 82: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Five are regarded as
     martyrs: They are those who die because of
     plague, abdominal disease, drowning or a falling
     building etc., and the martyrs in Allah's Cause." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 83: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Plauge is the cause of
     martyrdom of every Muslim (who dies because
     of it)." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 84: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     When the Divine Inspiration: "Those of the
     believers who sit (at home), was revealed the
     Prophet sent for Zaid (bin Thabit) who came
     with a shoulder-blade and wrote on it. Ibn
     Um-Maktum complained about his blindness and
     on that the following revelation came: "Not equal
     are those believers who sit (at home) except
     those who are disabled (by injury, or are blind or
     lame etc.) and those who strive hard and fight in
     the Way of Allah with their wealth and lives)."
     (4.95) 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 85: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi: 

     I saw Marwan bin Al-Hakam sitting in the
     Mosque. So I came forward and sat by his side.
     He told us that Zaid bin Thabit had told him that
     Allah's Apostle had dictated to him the Divine
     Verse: 

     "Not equal are those believers who sit (at home)
     and those who strive hard and fight in the Cause
     of Allah with their wealth and lives.' (4.95) 

     Zaid said, "Ibn-Maktum came to the Prophet
     while he was dictating to me that very Verse. On
     that Ibn Um Maktum said, "O Allah's Apostle! If
     I had power, I would surely take part in Jihad."
     He was a blind man. So Allah sent down
     revelation to His Apostle while his thigh was on
     mine and it became so heavy for me that I feared
     that my thigh would be broken. Then that state of
     the Prophet was over after Allah revealed
     "...except those who are disabled (by injury or
     are blind or lame etc.) (4.95) 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 86: 

     Narrated Salim Abu-An-Nadr: 

     'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa wrote and I read what he
     wrote that Allah's Apostle said, "When you face
     them ( i.e. your enemy) then be patient." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 87: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle went towards the Khandaq (i.e.
     Trench) and saw the Emigrants and the Ansar
     digging in a very cold morning as they did not
     have slaves to do that for them. When he noticed
     their fatigue and hunger he said, "O Allah! The
     real life is that of the Here-after, (so please)
     forgive the Ansar and the Emigrants." In its reply
     the Emigrants and the Ansar said, "We are those
     who have given a pledge of allegiance to
     Muhammad that we will carry on Jihad as long as
     we live." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 88: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Emigrants and the Ansar started digging the
     trench around Medina carrying the earth on their
     backs and saying, "We are those who have given
     a pledge of allegiance to Muhammad that we will
     I carry on Jihad as long as we live." The Prophet
     kept on replying, "O Allah, there is no good
     except the good of the Hereafter; so confer Your
     Blessings on the Ansar and the Emigrants." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 89: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The Prophet went on carrying (i.e. the earth) and
     saying, "Without You (O Allah!) we would have
     got no guidance." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 90: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     On the day (of the battle) of Al-Ahzab (i.e.
     clans) I saw the Prophet carrying earth, and the
     earth was covering the whiteness of his
     abdomen. And he was saying, "Without You (O
     Allah!) we would have got no guidance, nor
     given in charity, nor prayed. So please bless us
     with tranquility and make firm our feet when we
     meet our enemies. 

     Indeed (these) people have rebelled against
     (oppressed) us but never shall we yield if they try
     to bring affliction upon us." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 91: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     We returned from the Ghazwa of Tabuk along
     with the Prophet. (See Hadith No. 92 below) . 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 92: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     While the Prophet was in a Ghazwa he said,
     "Some people have remained behind us in
     Medina and we never crossed a mountain path
     or a valley, but they were with us (i.e. sharing the
     reward with us), as they have been held back by
     a (legal) excuse. " 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 93: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Indeed, anyone who
     fasts for one day for Allah's Pleasure, Allah will
     keep his face away from the (Hell) fire for (a
     distance covered by a journey of) seventy years."


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 94: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever spends two things
     in Allah's Cause, will be called by all the
     gate-keepers of Paradise who will be saying, 'O
     so-and-so! Come here.' " Abu Bakr said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Such persons will never be
     destroyed." The Prophet said, "I hope you will
     be one of them." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 95: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle ascended the pulpit and said,
     "Nothing worries me as to what will happen to
     you after me, except the temptation of worldly
     blessings which will be conferred on you." Then
     he mentioned the worldly pleasures. He started
     with the one (i.e. the blessings) and took up the
     other (i.e. the pleasures). A man got up saying,
     "O Allah's Apostle! Can the good bring about
     evil?" The Prophet remained silent and we
     thought that he was being inspired divinely, so all
     the people kept silent with awe. Then the
     Prophet wiped the sweat off his face and asked,
     "Where is the present questioner?" "Do you think
     wealth is good?" he repeated thrice, adding, "No
     doubt, good produces nothing but good. Indeed
     it is like what grows on the banks of a stream
     which either kills or nearly kills the grazing
     animals because of gluttony except the
     vegetation-eating animal which eats till both its
     flanks are full (i.e. till it gets satisfied) and then
     stands in the sun and defecates and urinates and
     again starts grazing. This worldly property is
     sweet vegetation. How excellent the wealth of
     the Muslim is, if it is collected through legal
     means and is spent in Allah's Cause and on
     orphans, poor people and travelers. But he who
     does not take it legally is like an eater who is
     never satisfied and his wealth will be a witness
     against him on the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 96: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid: 

     Allah's Apostle said, " He who pre pares a Ghazi
     going in Allah's Cause is given a reward equal to
     that of) a Ghazi; and he who looks after properly
     the dependents of a Ghazi going in Allah's Cause
     is (given a reward equal to that of) Ghazi." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 97: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet used not to enter any house in
     Medina except the house of Um Sulaim besides
     those of his wives when he was asked why, he
     said, "I take pity on her as her brother was killed
     in my company. " 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 98: 

     Narrated Ibn Aun: 

     Once Musa bin Anas while describing the battle
     of Yamama, said, "Anas bin Malik went to
     Thabit bin Qais, who had lifted his clothes from
     his thighs and was applying Hunut to his body.
     Anas asked, 'O Uncle! What is holding you back
     (from the battle)?' He replied, 'O my nephew! I
     am coming just now,' and went on perfuming
     himself with Hunut, then he came and sat (in the
     row). Anas then mentioned that the people fled
     from the battle-field. On that Thabit said, 'Clear
     the way for me to fight the enemy. We would
     never do so (i.e. flee) in the company of Allah's
     Apostle. How bad the habits you have acquired
     from your enemies!" 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 99: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet said, "Who will bring me the
     information about the enemy on the day (of the
     battle) of Al-Ahzab (i.e. Clans)?" Az-Zubair
     said, "I will." The Prophet said again, "Who will
     bring me the information about the enemy?"
     Az-Zubair said again, "I will." The Prophet said,
     "Every prophet had a disciple and my disciple is
     Az-Zubair. " 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 100: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     When the Prophet called the people (Sadqa, a
     sub-narrator, said, 'Most probably that
     happened on the day of Al-Khandaq) Az-Zubair
     responded to the call (i.e. to act as a
     reconnoiter). The Prophet) called the people
     again and Az-Zubair responded to the call. The
     Prophet then said, "Every prophet had a disciple
     and my disciple is Zubair bin Al-'Awwam." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 101: 

     Narrated Malik bin Al-Huwairith: 

     On my departure from the Prophet he said to me
     and to a friend of mine, "You two, pronounce the
     Adhan and the Iqama for the prayer and let the
     elder of you lead the prayer." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 102: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Good will remain (as a
     permanent quality) in the foreheads of horses till
     the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 103: 

     Narrated Ursa bin ALGA: 

     The Prophet said, "Good will remain (as a
     permanent quality) in the foreheads of horses till
     the Day of Resurrection." 

     And narrated Anas bin Malik: Allah's Apostle
     said, "There is a blessing in the fore-heads of
     horses." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 104: 

     Narrated 'Urwa Al-Bariqi: 

     The Prophet said, "Good will remain (as a
     permanent quality) in the foreheads of horses (for
     Jihad) till the Day of Resurrection, for they bring
     about either a reward (in the Hereafter) or booty
     (in this world." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 105: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "If somebody keeps a horse in
     Allah's Cause motivated by his faith in Allah and
     his belief in His Promise, then he will be
     rewarded on the Day of Resurrection for what
     the horse has eaten or drunk and for its dung and
     urine." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 106: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada: 

     (from his father) Abu Qatada went out (on a
     journey) with Allah's Apostle but he was left
     behind with some of his companions who were in
     the state of Ihram. He himself was not in the state
     of Ihram. They saw an opener before he could
     see it. When they saw the opener, they did not
     speak anything till Abu Qatada saw it. So, he
     rode over his horse called Al-Jarada and
     requested them to give him his lash, but they
     refused. So, he himself took it and then attacked
     the opener and slaughtered it. He ate of its meat
     and his companions ate, too, but they regretted
     their eating. When they met the Prophet (they
     asked him about it) and he asked, "Have you
     some of its meat (left) with you?" Abu Qatada
     replied, "Yes, we have its leg with us." So, the
     Prophet took and ate it. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 107: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     In our garden there was a horse belonging to the
     Prophet called Al-Luhaif or Al-Lakhif. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 108: 

     Narrated Mu'adh: 

     I was a companion rider of the Prophet on a
     donkey called 'Ufair. The Prophet asked, "O
     Mu'adh! Do you know what Allah's right on His
     slaves is, and what the right of His slaves on Him
     is?" I replied, "Allah and His Apostle know
     better." He said, "Allah's right on His slaves is
     that they should worship Him (Alone) and should
     not worship any besides Him. And slave's right
     on Allah is that He should not punish him who
     worships none besides Him." I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Should I not inform the people of this
     good news?" He said, "Do not inform them of it,
     lest they should depend on it (absolutely)." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 109: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once there was a feeling of fright in Medina, so
     the Prophet borrowed a horse belonging to us
     called Mandub (and he rode away on it). (When
     the Prophet returned) he said, "I have not seen
     anything of fright and I found it (i.e. this horse)
     very fast." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 110: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     I heard the Prophet saying. "Evil omen is in three
     things: The horse, the woman and the house." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 111: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad Saidi: 

     Allah's Apostle said "If there is any evil omen in
     anything, then it is in the woman, the horse and
     the house." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 112: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, " Horses are kept for one of
     three purposes; for some people they are a
     source of reward, for some others they are a
     means of shelter and for some others they are a
     source of sins. The one for whom they are a
     source of reward, is he who keeps a horse for
     Allah's Cause (i.e. Jihad) tying it with a long
     tether on a meadow or in a garden with the result
     that whatever it eats from the area of the
     meadow or the garden where it is tied will be
     counted as good deeds for his benefit, and if it
     should break its rope and jump over one or two
     hillocks then all its dung and its foot marks will be
     written as good deeds for him; and if it passes by
     a river and drinks water from it even though he
     had no intention of watering it, even then he will
     get the reward for its drinking. As for the man for
     whom horses are a source of sins, he is the one
     who keeps a horse for the sake of pride and
     pretense and showing enmity for Muslims: such a
     horse will be a source of sins for him. When
     Allah's Apostle was asked about donkeys, he
     replied, "Nothing has been revealed to me about
     them except this unique, comprehensive Verse:
     "Then anyone who does an atom's (or a small
     ant's) weight of good shall see it; And anyone
     who does an atom's (or a small ant's) weight of
     evil, shall see it.' (101.7-8) 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 113: 

     Narrated Muslim from Abu Aqil from Abu
     Al-Mutawakkil An-Naji: 

     I called on Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari and said
     to him, "Relate to me what you have heard from
     Allah's Apostle ." He said, "I accompanied him
     on one of the journeys." (Abu Aqil said, "I do not
     know whether that journey was for the purpose
     of Jihad or 'Umra.") "When we were returning,"
     Jabir continued, "the Prophet said, 'Whoever
     wants to return earlier to his family, should hurry
     up.' We set off and I was on a black red tainted
     camel having no defect, and the people were
     behind me. While I was in that state the camel
     stopped suddenly (because of exhaustion). On
     that the Prophet said to me, 'O Jabir, wait!' Then
     he hit it once with his lash and it started moving
     on a fast pace. He then said, 'Will you sell the
     camel?' I replied in the affirmative when we
     reached Medina, and the Prophet went to the
     Mosque along with his companions. I, too, went
     to him after tying the camel on the pavement at
     the Mosque gate. Then I said to him, 'This is
     your camel.' He came out and started examining
     the camel and saying, 'The camel is ours.' Then
     the Prophet sent some Awaq (i.e. an amount) of
     gold saying, 'Give it to Jabir.' Then he asked,
     'Have you taken the full price (of the camel)?' I
     replied in the affirmative. He said, 'Both the price
     and the camel are for you.' '' 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 114: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     There was a feeling of fright in Medina, so the
     Prophet borrowed a horse called Mandub
     belonging 'to Abu Talha and mounted it. (On his
     return), he said, "I did not see anything of fright
     and I found this horse very fast." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 115: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle fixed two shares for the horse
     and one share for its rider (from the war booty). 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 116: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     Somebody asked Al-Bar-a bin 'Azib, "Did you
     flee deserting Allah's Apostle during the battle of
     Hunain?" Al-Bara replied, "But Allah's Apostle
     did not flee. The people of the Tribe of Hawazin
     were good archers. When we met them, we
     attacked them, and they fled. When the Muslims
     started collecting the war booty, the pagans
     faced us with arrows, but Allah's Apostle did not
     flee. No doubt, I saw him on his white mule and
     Abu Sufyan was holding its reins and the Prophet
     was saying, 'I am the Prophet in truth: I am the
     son of 'Abdul Muttalib.' " 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 117: 

     Narrated Ibn'Umar: 

     When the Prophet put his feet in the stirrup and
     the she-camel got up carrying him he would start
     reciting Talbiya at the mosque of Dhul-Hulaifa. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 118: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet met them (i.e. the people) while he
     was riding an unsaddled horse with his sword
     slung over his shoulder. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 119: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once the people of Medina were frightened, so
     the Prophet rode a horse belonging to Abu Talha
     and it ran slowly, or was of narrow paces. When
     he returned, he said, "I found your (i.e. Abu
     Talha's) horse very fast. After that the horse
     could not be surpassed in running..' 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 120: 

     Narrated ('Abdullah) bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet arranged for a horse race amongst
     the horses that had been made lean to take place
     between Al-Hafya'' and Thaniyat Al-Wada' (i.e.
     names of two places) and the horses which had
     not been mad.? lean from Ath-Thaniyat to the
     mosque of Bani Zuraiq. I was also amongst those
     who took part in that horse race. Sufyan, a
     sub-narrator, said, "The distance between
     Al-Hafya and Thaniya Al-Wada' is five or six
     miles; and between Thaniya and the mosque of
     Bani Zuraiq is one mile." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 121: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     The Prophet arranged for a horse race of the
     horses which had not been made lean; the area
     of the race was from Ath-Thaniya to the mosque
     of Bani Zuraiq. (The sub-narrator said,
     "'Abdullah bin 'Umar was amongst those who
     participated in that horse race."). 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 122: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq from Musa bin 'Uqba from
     Mafia from Ibn 'Umar who said: 

     "Allah's Apostle arranged a horse race amongst
     the horses that had been made lean, letting them
     start from Al-Hafya' and their limit (distance of
     running) was up to Thaniyat-al-Wada'. I asked
     Musa, 'What was the distance between the two
     places?' Musa replied, 'Six or seven miles. He
     arranged a race of the horses which had not been
     made lean sending them from Thaniyat-al-Wada',
     and their limit was up to the mosque of Bani
     Zuraiq.' I asked, 'What was the distance
     between those two places?' He replied 'One mile
     or so.' Ibn 'Umar was amongst those who
     participated in that horse race." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 123: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The she camel of the Prophet was called
     Al-Adba. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 124: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet had a she camel called Al Adba
     which could not be excelled in a race. (Humaid,
     a sub-narrator said, "Or could hardly be
     excelled.") Once a bedouin came riding a camel
     below six years of age which surpasses it (i.e.
     Al'Adba) in the race. The Muslims felt it so much
     that the Prophet noticed their distress. He then
     said, "It is Allah's Law that He brings down
     whatever rises high in the world." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 125: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Al-Harith: 

     The Prophet did not leave anything behind him
     after his death except a white mule, his arms and
     a piece of land which he left to be given in
     charity. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 126: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     that a man asked him. "O Abu 'Umara! Did you
     flee on the day (of the battle) of Hunain?" He
     replied, "No, by Allah, the Prophet did not flee
     but the hasty people fled and the people of the
     Tribe of Hawazin attacked them with arrows,
     while the Prophet was riding his white mule and
     Abu Sufyan bin Al-Harith was holding its reins,
     and the Prophet was saying, 'I am the Prophet in
     truth, I am the son of 'Abdul Muttalib.' " 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 127: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     the mother of the faithful believers, I requested
     the Prophet permit me to participate in Jihad, but
     he said, "Your Jihad is the performance of Hajj." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 128: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     the mother of the faithful believers: The Prophet
     was asked by his wives about the Jihad and he
     replied, "The best Jihad (for you) is (the
     performance of) Hajj." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 129: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle went to the daughter of Milhan
     and reclined there (and slept) and then (woke
     up) smiling. She asked, "O Allah's Apostle!
     What makes you smile?" He replied, (I dreamt
     that) some people amongst my followers were
     sailing on the green sea in Allah's Cause,
     resembling kings on thrones." She said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make me one of
     them." He said, "O Allah! Let her be one of
     them." Then he (slept again and woke up and)
     smiled. She asked him the same question and he
     gave the same reply. She said, "Invoke Allah to
     make me one of them." He replied, ''You will be
     amongst the first group of them; you will not be
     amongst the last." Later on she married 'Ubada
     bin As-Samit and then she sailed on the sea with
     bint Qaraza, Mu'awiya's wife (for Jihad). On her
     return, she mounted her riding animal, which
     threw her down breaking her neck, and she died
     on falling down. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 130: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever the Prophet intended to proceed on a
     journey, he used to draw lots amongst his wives
     and would take the one upon whom the lot fell.
     Once, before setting out for Jihad, he drew lots
     amongst us and the lot came to me; so I went
     with the Prophet; and that happened after the
     revelation of the Verse Hijab (i.e. veiling). 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 131: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     On the day (of the battle) of Uhad when (some)
     people retreated and left the Prophet, I saw
     'Aisha bint Abu Bakr and Um Sulaim, with their
     robes tucked up so that the bangles around their
     ankles were visible hurrying with their water skins
     (in another narration it is said, "carrying the water
     skins on their backs"). Then they would pour the
     water in the mouths of the people, and return to
     fill the water skins again and came back again to
     pour water in the mouths of the people. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 132: 

     Narrated Tha'laba bin Abi Malik: 

     'Umar bin Al-Khattab distributed some garments
     amongst the women of Medina. One good
     garment remained, and one of those present with
     him said, "O chief of the believers! Give this
     garment to your wife, the (grand) daughter of
     Allah's Apostle." They meant Um Kulthum, the
     daughter of 'Ali. 'Umar said, Um Salit has more
     right (to have it)." Um Salit was amongst those
     Ansari women who had given the pledge of
     allegiance to Allah's Apostle.' 'Umar said, "She
     (i.e. Um Salit) used to carry the water skins for
     us on the day of Uhud." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 133: 

     Narrated Ar-Rubayyi 'bint Mu'auwidh: 

     We were in the company of the Prophet
     providing the wounded with water and treating
     them and bringing the killed to Medina (from the
     battle field) . 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 134: 

     Narrated Ar-Rabi'bint Mu'auwidh: 

     We used to take part in holy battles with the
     Prophet by providing the people with water and
     serving them and bringing the killed and the
     wounded back to Medina. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 135: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     Abu 'Amir was hit with an arrow in his knee, so I
     went to him and he asked me to remove the
     arrow. When I removed it, the water started
     dribbling from it. Then I went to the Prophet and
     told him about it. He said, "O Allah! Forgive
     'Ubaid Abu 'Amir." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 136: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet was vigilant one night and when he
     reached Medina, he said, "Would that a pious
     man from my companions guard me tonight!"
     Suddenly we heard the clatter of arms. He said,
     "Who is that? " He (The new comer) replied, " I
     am Sad bin Abi Waqqas and have come to
     guard you." So, the Prophet slept (that night). 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 137: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Let the slave of Dinar and
     Dirham of Quantify and Khamisa (i.e. money and
     luxurious clothes) perish for he is pleased if these
     things are given to him, and if not, he is
     displeased!" 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, " Let
     the slave of Dinar and Dirham, of Quantify and
     Khamisa perish as he is pleased if these things
     are given to him, and if not, he is displeased. Let
     such a person perish and relapse, and if he is
     pierced with a thorn, let him not find anyone to
     take it out for him. Paradise is for him who holds
     the reins of his horse to strive in Allah's Cause,
     with his hair unkempt and feet covered with dust:
     if he is appointed in the vanguard, he is perfectly
     satisfied with his post of guarding, and if he is
     appointed in the rearward, he accepts his post
     with satisfaction; (he is so simple and
     unambiguous that) if he asks for permission he is
     not permitted, and if he intercedes, his
     intercession is not accepted." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 138: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I was in the company of Jabir bin 'Abdullah on a
     journey and he used to serve me though he was
     older than I. Jarir said, "I saw the Ansar doing a
     thing (i.e. showing great reverence to the Prophet
     ) for which I have vowed that whenever I meet
     any of them, I will serve him." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 139: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     I went along with the Prophet to Khaibar so as
     to serve him. (Later on) when the Prophet
     returned he, on seeing the Uhud mountain, said,
     "This is a mountain that loves us andis loved by
     us." Then he pointed to Medina with his hand
     saying, "O Allah! I make the area which is in
     between Medina's two mountains a sanctuary, as
     Abraham made Mecca a sanctuary. O Allah!
     Bless us in our Sa and Mudd (i.e. units of
     measuring)." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 140: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     We were with the Prophet (on a journey) and the
     only shade one could have was the shade made
     by one's own garment. Those who fasted did not
     do any work and those who did not fast served
     the camels and brought the water on them and
     treated the sick and (wounded). So, the Prophet
     said, "Today, those who were not fasting took
     (all) the reward." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 141: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Charity is obligatory everyday
     on every joint of a human being. If one helps a
     person in matters concerning his riding animal by
     helping him to ride it or by lifting his luggage on to
     it, all this will be regarded charity. A good word,
     and every step one takes to offer the compulsory
     Congregational prayer, is regarded as charity;
     and guiding somebody on the road is regarded as
     charity." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 142: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'di : 

     Allah's Apostle said, "To guard Muslims from
     infidels in Allah's Cause for one day is better than
     the world and whatever is on its surface, and a
     place in Paradise as small as that occupied by the
     whip of one of you is better than the world and
     whatever is on its surface; and a morning's or an
     evening's journey which a slave (person) travels
     in Allah's Cause is better than the world and
     whatever is on its surface." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 143: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said to Abu Talha, "Choose one of
     your boy servants to serve me in my expedition
     to Khaibar." So, Abu Talha took me letting me
     ride behind him while I was a boy nearing the age
     of puberty. I used to serve Allah's Apostle when
     he stopped to rest. I heard him saying
     repeatedly, "O Allah! I seek refuge with You
     from distress and sorrow, from helplessness and
     laziness, from miserliness and cowardice, from
     being heavily in debt and from being overcome
     by men." Then we reached Khaibar; and when
     Allah enabled him to conquer the Fort (of
     Khaibar), the beauty of Safiya bint Huyai bin
     Akhtab was described to him. Her husband had
     been killed while she was a bride. So Allah's
     Apostle selected her for himself and took her
     along with him till we reached a place called
     Sad-AsSahba,' where her menses were over and
     he took her for his wife. Haris (a kind of dish)
     was served on a small leather sheet. Then Allah's
     Apostle told me to call those who were around
     me. So, that was the marriage banquet of Allah's
     Apostle and Safiya. Then we left for Medina. I
     saw Allah's Apostle folding a cloak round the
     hump of the camel so as to make a wide space
     for Safiya (to sit on behind him) He sat beside his
     camel letting his knees for Safiya to put her feet
     on so as to mount the camel. Then, we
     proceeded till we approached Medina; he
     looked at Uhud (mountain) and said, "This is a
     mountain which loves us and is loved by us."
     Then he looked at Medina and said, "O Allah! I
     make the area between its (i.e. Medina's) two
     mountains a sanctuary as Abraham made Mecca
     a sanctuary. O Allah! Bless them (i.e. the people
     of Medina) in their Mudd and Sa (i.e.
     measures)." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 144: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Um Haram told me that the Prophet one day
     took a midday nap in her house. Then he woke
     up smiling. Um Haram asked, "O Allah's
     Apostle! What makes you smile?" He replied "I
     was astonished to see (in my dream) some
     people amongst my followers on a sea-voyage
     looking like kings on the thrones." She said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make me one of
     them." He replied, "You are amongst them." He
     slept again and then woke up smiling and said the
     same as before twice or thrice. And she said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make me one of
     them." And he said, "You are amongst the first
     batch." 'Ubada bin As-Samit married her (i.e.
     Um Haram) and then he took her for Jihad.
     When she returned, an animal was presented to
     her to ride, but she fell down and her neck was
     broken. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 145: 

     Narrated Mus'ab bin Sad: 

     Once Sad (bin Abi Waqqas) thought that he was
     superior to those who were below him in rank.
     On that the Prophet said, "You gain no victory or
     livelihood except through (the blessings and
     invocations of) the poor amongst you." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 146: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri 

     The Prophet said, "A time will come when
     groups of people will go for Jihad and it will be
     asked, 'Is there anyone amongst you who has
     enjoyed the company of the Prophet?' The
     answer will be, 'Yes.' Then they will be given
     victory (by Allah) (because of him). Then a time
     will come when it will be asked. 'Is there anyone
     amongst you who has enjoyed the company of
     the companions of the Prophet?' It will be said,
     'Yes,' and they will be given victory (by Allah).
     Then a time will come when it will be said. 'Is
     there anyone amongst you who has enjoyed the
     company of the companions of the companions
     of the Prophet?' It will be said, 'Yes,' and they
     will be given victory (by Allah)." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 147: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi: 

     Allah's Apostle and the pagans faced each other
     and started fighting. When Allah's Apostle
     returned to his camp and when the pagans
     returned to their camp, somebody talked about a
     man amongst the companions of Allah's Apostle
     who would follow and kill with his sword any
     pagan going alone. He said, "Nobody did his job
     (i.e. fighting) so properly today as that man."
     Allah's Apostle said, "Indeed, he is amongst the
     people of the (Hell) Fire." A man amongst the
     people said, "I shall accompany him (to watch
     what he does)" Thus he accompanied him, and
     wherever he stood, he would stand with him, and
     wherever he ran, he would run with him. 

     Then the (brave) man got wounded seriously and
     he decided to bring about his death quickly. He
     planted the blade of the sword in the ground
     directing its sharp end towards his chest between
     his two breasts. Then he leaned on the sword
     and killed himself. The other man came to Allah's
     Apostle and said, "I testify that you are Allah's
     Apostle." The Prophet asked, "What has
     happened?" He replied, "(It is about) the man
     whom you had described as one of the people of
     the (Hell) Fire. The people were greatly
     surprised at what you said, and I said, 'I will find
     out his reality for you.' So, I came out seeking
     him. He got severely wounded, and hastened to
     die by slanting the blade of his sword in the
     ground directing its sharp end towards his chest
     between his two breasts. Then he eased on his
     sword and killed himself." when Allah's Apostle
     said, "A man may seem to the people as if he
     were practising the deeds of the people of
     Paradise while in fact he is from the people of the
     Hell) Fire, another may seem to the people as if
     he were practicing the deeds of the people of
     Hell (Fire), while in fact he is from the people of
     Paradise." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 148: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     The Prophet passed by some people of the tribe
     of Bani Aslam who were practicing archery. The
     Prophet said, "O Bani Ismail ! Practice archery
     as your father Isma'il was a great archer. Keep
     on throwing arrows and I am with Bani
     so-and-so." So one of the parties ceased
     throwing. Allah's Apostle said, "Why do you not
     throw?" They replied, "How should we throw
     while you are with them (i.e. on their side)?" On
     that the Prophet said, "Throw, and I am with all
     of you." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 149: 

     Narrated Abu Usaid: 

     On the day (of the battle) of Badr when we
     stood in rows against (the army of) Quraish and
     they stood in rows against us, the Prophet said,
     "When they do come near you, throw arrows at
     them." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 150: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     While some Ethiopians were playing in the
     presence of the Prophet, 'Umar came in, picked
     up a stone and hit them with it. On that the
     Prophet said, "O 'Umar! Allow them (to play)."
     Ma'mar (the sub-narrator) added that they were
     playing in the Mosque. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 151: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Abu Talha and the Prophet used to shield
     themselves with one shield. Abu Talha was a
     good archer, and when he threw (his arrows) the
     Prophet would look at the target of his arrows. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 152: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     When the helmet of the Prophet was smashed on
     his head and blood covered his face and one of
     his front teeth got broken, 'Ali brought the water
     in his shield and Fatima the Prophet's daughter)
     washed him. But when she saw that the bleeding
     increased more by the water, she took a mat,
     burnt it, and placed the ashes on the wound of
     the Prophet and so the blood stopped oozing
     out. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 153: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     The properties of Bani An-Nadir which Allah
     had transferred to His Apostle as Fai Booty
     were not gained by the Muslims with their horses
     and camels. The properties therefore, belonged
     especially to Allah's Apostle who used to give his
     family their yearly expenditure and spend what
     remained thereof on arms and horses to be used
     in Allah's Cause. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 154: 

     Narrated Ali: 

     I never saw the Prophet saying, "Let my parents
     sacrifice their lives for you," to any man after
     Sad. I heard him saying (to him), "Throw (the
     arrows)! Let my parents sacrifice their lives for
     you." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 155: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle came to my house while two girls
     were singing beside me the songs of Bu'ath (a
     story about the war between the two tribes of the
     Ansar, i.e. Khazraj and Aus, before Islam.) The
     Prophet reclined on the bed and turned his face
     to the other side. Abu Bakr came and scolded
     me and said protestingly, "Instrument of Satan in
     the presence of Allah's Apostle?" Allah's Apostle
     turned his face towards him and said, "Leave
     them." When Abu Bakr became inattentive, I
     waved the two girls to go away and they left. It
     was the day of 'Id when negroes used to play
     with leather shields and spears. Either I
     requested Allah's Apostle or he himself asked me
     whether I would like to see the display. I replied
     in the affirmative. Then he let me stand behind
     him and my cheek was touching his cheek and he
     was saying, "Carry on, O Bani Arfida (i.e.
     negroes)!" When I got tired, he asked me if that
     was enough. I replied in the affirmative and he
     told me to leave. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 156: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The 'Prophet was the best and the bravest
     amongst the people. Once the people of Medina
     got terrified at night, so they went in the direction
     of the noise (that terrified them). The Prophet
     met them (on his way back) after he had found
     out the truth. He was riding an unsaddled horse
     belonging to Abu Talha and a sword was hanging
     by his neck, and he was saying, "Don't be afraid!
     Don't be afraid!" He further said, "I found it (i.e.
     the horse) very fast," or said, "This horse is very
     fast." (Qastala-ni) 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 157: 

     Narrated Abu Umama: 

     Some people conquered many countries and
     their swords were decorated neither with gold
     nor silver, but they were decorated with leather,
     lead and iron. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 158: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     That he proceeded in the company of Allah's
     Apostle towards Najd to participate in a
     Ghazwa. (Holy-battle) When Allah's Apostle
     returned, he too returned with him. Midday came
     upon them while they were in a valley having
     many thorny trees. Allah's Apostle and the
     people dismounted and dispersed to rest in the
     shade of the trees. Allah's Apostle rested under a
     tree and hung his sword on it. We all took a nap
     and suddenly we heard Allah's Apostle calling us.
     (We woke up) to see a bedouin with him. The
     Prophet said, "This bedouin took out my sword
     while I was sleeping and when I woke up, I
     found the unsheathed sword in his hand and he
     challenged me saying, 'Who will save you from
     me?' I said thrice, 'Allah.' The Prophet did not
     punish him but sat down. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 159: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     That he was asked about the wound of the
     Prophet on the day (of the battle) of Uhud. He
     said, "The face of the Prophet as wounded and
     one of his front teeth as broken and the helmet
     over his head was smashed. Fatima washed of
     the blood while Ali held water. When she saw
     that bleeding was increasing continuously, she
     burnt a mat (of date-palm leaves) till it turned into
     ashes which she put over the wound and thus the
     bleeding ceased." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 160: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Al-Harith: 

     The Prophet did not leave behind him after his
     death, anything except his arms, his white mule,
     and a piece of land at Khaibar which he left to be
     given in charity . 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 161: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     as above (Hadith No. 158). 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 162: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     That he participated in a Ghazwa (Holy-Battle) in
     the company of Allah's Apostle. Midday came
     upon them while they were in a valley having
     many thorny trees. The people dispersed to rest
     in the shade of the trees. The Prophet rested
     under a tree, hung his sword on it, and then slept.
     Then he woke up to find near to him, a man
     whose presence he had not noticed before. The
     Prophet said, "This (man) took my sword (out of
     its scabbard) and said, 'Who will save you from
     me.' I replied, 'Allah.' So, he put the sword back
     into its scabbard, and you see him sitting here."
     Anyhow, the Prophet did not punish him. (See
     Hadith No. 158) 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 163: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     That he was in the company of Allah's Apostle
     and when they had covered a portion of the road
     to Mecca, he and some of the companions
     lagged behind. The latter were in a state of
     Ihram, while he was not. He saw an onager and
     rode his horse and requested his companions to
     give him his lash but they refused. Then he asked
     them to give him his spear but they refused, so he
     took it himself, attacked the onager, and killed it.
     Some of the companions of the Prophet ate of it
     while some others refused to eat. When they
     caught up with Allah's Apostle they asked him
     about that, and he said, "That was a meal Allah
     fed you with." (It is also said that Allah's Apostle
     asked, "Have you got something of its meat?") 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 164: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet , while in a tent (on the day of the
     battle of Badr) said, "O Allah! I ask you the
     fulfillment of Your Covenant and Promise. O
     Allah! If You wish (to destroy the believers) You
     will never be worshipped after today." Abu Bakr
     caught him by the hand and said, "This is
     sufficient, O Allah's Apostle! You have asked
     Allah pressingly." The Prophet was clad in his
     armor at that time. He went out, saying to me:
     "There multitude will be put to flight and they will
     show their backs. Nay, but the Hour is their
     appointed time (for their full recompense) and
     that Hour will be more grievous and more bitter
     (than their worldly failure)." (54.45-46) Khalid
     said that was on the day of the battle of Badr. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 165: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle died while his (iron) armor was
     mortgaged to a Jew for thirty Sas of barley. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 166: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The example of a miser and
     the one who gives in charity, is like the example
     of two men wearing iron cloaks so tightly that
     their arms are raised forcibly towards their
     collar-bones. So, whenever a charitable person
     wants to give in charity, his cloak spreads over
     his body so much so that it wipes out his traces,
     but whenever the miser wants to give in charity,
     the rings (of the iron cloak) come closer to each
     other and press over his body, and his hands gets
     connected to his collar-bones. Abu Huraira
     heard the Prophet saying. "The miser then tries to
     widen it but in vain." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 167: 

     Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba: 

     Allah's Apostle went out to answer the call of
     nature and on his return I brought some water to
     him. He performed the ablution while he was
     wearing a Sha'mi cloak. He rinsed his mouth and
     washed his nose by putting water in it and then
     blowing it out, and washed his face. Then he
     tried to take out his hands through his sleeves but
     they were tight, so he took them out from
     underneath, washed them and passed wet hands
     over his head and over his leather socks. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 168: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet allowed 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf
     and Az-Zubair to wear silken shirts because they
     had a skin disease causing itching. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 169: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     as above. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 170: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Abdur Rahman bin 'Auf and Az-Zubair
     complained to the Prophet, i.e. about the lice
     (that caused itching) so he allowed them to wear
     silken clothes. I saw them wearing such clothes in
     a holy battle. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 171: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet allowed 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf
     and Az-Zubair bin Al-'Awwam to wear silk. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 172: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     (Wearing of silk) was allowed to them (i.e.
     'AbdurRahman and Az-Zubair) because of the
     itching they suffered from. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 173: 

     Narrated Umaiya Ad-Damri: 

     I saw the Prophet eating of a shoulder (of a
     sheep) by cutting from it and then he was called
     to prayer and he prayed without repeating his
     ablution. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 174: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: 

     as above (Hadith No. 173...) and added that the
     Prophet put the knife down. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 175: 

     Narrated Khalid bin Madan: 

     That 'Umair bin Al-Aswad Al-Anasi told him that
     he went to 'Ubada bin As-Samit while he was
     staying in his house at the sea-shore of Hims with
     (his wife) Um Haram. 'Umair said. Um Haram
     informed us that she heard the Prophet saying,
     "Paradise is granted to the first batch of my
     followers who will undertake a naval expedition."
     Um Haram added, I said, 'O Allah's Apostle!
     Will I be amongst them?' He replied, 'You are
     amongst them.' The Prophet then said, 'The first
     army amongst' my followers who will invade
     Caesar's City will be forgiven their sins.' I asked,
     'Will I be one of them, O Allah's Apostle?' He
     replied in the negative." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 176: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "You (i.e. Muslims) will
     fight wi the Jews till some of them will hide
     behind stones. The stones will (betray them)
     saying, 'O 'Abdullah (i.e. slave of Allah)! There is
     a Jew hiding behind me; so kill him.' " 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 177: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be
     established until you fight with the Jews, and the
     stone behind which a Jew will be hiding will say.
     "O Muslim! There is a Jew hiding behind me, so
     kill him." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 178: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Taghlib: 

     The Prophet said, "One of the portents of the
     Hour is that you will fight with people wearing
     shoes made of hair; and one of the portents of
     the Hour is that you will fight with broad-faced
     people whose faces will look like shields coated
     with leather." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 179: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be
     established until you fight with the Turks; people
     with small eyes, red faces, and flat noses. Their
     faces will look like shields coated with leather.
     The Hour will not be established till you fight with
     people whose shoes are made of hair." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 180: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The Hour will not be
     established till you fight with people wearing
     shoes made of hair. And the Hour will not be
     established till you fight with people whose faces
     look like shields coated with leather. " (Abu
     Huraira added, "They will be) small-eyed, flat
     nosed, and their faces will look like shields
     coated with leather.") 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 181: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     A man asked Al-Bara', "O Abu 'Umara! Did you
     all flee on the day (of the battle) of Hunain?" He
     replied, "No, by Allah! Allah's Apostle did not
     flee, but his young unarmed companions passed
     by the archers of the tribe of Hawazin and Bani
     Nasr whose arrows hardly missed a target, and
     they threw arrows at them hardly missing a shot.
     So the Muslims retreated towards the Prophet
     while he was riding his white mule which was
     being led by his cousin Abu Sufyan bin Al-Harith
     bin 'Abdul Muttalib. The Prophet dismounted
     and invoked Allah for victory; then he said, 'I am
     the Prophet, without a lie; I am the son of 'Abdul
     Muttalib, and then he arranged his companions in
     rows." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 182: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     When it was the day of the battle of Al-Ahzab
     (i.e. the clans), Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah!
     Fill their (i.e. the infidels') houses and graves with
     fire as they busied us so much that we did not
     perform the prayer (i.e. 'Asr) till the sun set." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 183: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet used to recite the following
     invocations during Qunut: "O Allah! Save Salama
     bin Hisham. O Allah! Save Al-Walid bin
     Al-Walid. O Allah! Save 'Aiyash bin Rabi'a O
     Allah ! Save the weak Muslims. O Allah! Be
     very hard on Mudar tribe. O Allah! Afflict them
     with years (of famine) similar to the (famine)
     years of the time of Prophet Joseph." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 184: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa: 

     Allah's Apostle invoked evil upon the pagans on
     the ay (of the battle) of Al-Ahzab, saying, "O
     Allah! The Revealer of the Holy Book, the
     Swift-Taker of Accounts, O Allah, defeat
     Al-Ahzab (i.e. the clans), O Allah, defeat them
     and shake them." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 185: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     Once the Prophet was offering the prayer in the
     shade of the Ka'ba. Abu Jahl and some Quraishi
     men sent somebody to bring the abdominal
     contents of a shecamel which had been
     slaughtered somewhere in Mecca, and when he
     brought them, they put them over the Prophet
     Then Fatima (i.e. the Prophet's daughter) came
     and threw them away from him, and he said, "O
     Allah! Destroy (the pagans of) Quraish; O Allah!
     Destroy Quraish; O Allah Destroy Quraish,"
     naming especially Abu Jahl bin Hisham, 'Utba bin
     Rabi'a, Shaiba bin Rabi'a, Al Walid bin 'Utba,
     Ubai bin Khalaf and 'Uqba bin Abi Mitt. (The
     narrator, 'Abdullah added, "I saw them all killed
     and thrown in the Badr well). 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 186: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Once the Jews came to the Prophet and said,
     "Death be upon you." So I cursed them. The
     Prophet said, "What is the matter?" I said, "Have
     you not heard what they said?" The Prophet said,
     "Have you not heard what I replied (to them)? (I
     said), ('The same is upon you.')" 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 187: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle wrote a letter to Caesar saying,
     "If you reject Islam, you will be responsible for
     the sins of the peasants (i.e. your people)." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 188: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Tufail bin 'Amr Ad-Dausi and his companions
     came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! The people of the tribe of Daus
     disobeyed and refused to follow you; so invoke
     Allah against them." The people said, "The tribe
     of Daus is ruined." The Prophet said, "O Allah!
     Give guidance to the people of Daus, and let
     them embrace Islam." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 189: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When the Prophet intended to write a letter to
     the ruler of the Byzantines, he was told that those
     people did not read any letter unless it was
     stamped with a seal. So, the Prophet got a silver
     ring-- as if I were just looking at its white glitter
     on his hand ---- and stamped on it the
     expression "Muhammad, Apostle of Allah". 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 190: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle sent his letter to Khusrau and
     ordered his messenger to hand it over to the
     Governor of Bahrain who was to hand it over to
     Khusrau. So, when Khusrau read the letter he
     tore it. Said bin Al-Musaiyab said, "The Prophet
     then invoked Allah to disperse them with full
     dispersion, (destroy them (i.e. Khusrau and his
     followers) severely)". 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 191: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle wrote to Caesar and invited him
     to Islam and sent him his letter with Dihya
     Al-Kalbi whom Allah's Apostle ordered to hand
     it over to the Governor of Busra who would
     forward it to Caesar. Caesar as a sign of
     gratitude to Allah, had walked from Hims to Ilya
     (i.e. Jerusalem) when Allah had granted Him
     victory over the Persian forces. So, when the
     letter of Allah's Apostle reached Caesar, he said
     after reading t, 'Seek for me any one of his
     people! (Arabs of Quraish tribe) if present here,
     in order to ask him about Allah's Apostle. At that
     time Abu Sufyan bin Harb was in Sham with
     some men frown Quraish who had come (to
     Sham) as merchants during the truce that had
     been concluded between Allah's Apostle; and
     the infidels of Quraish. Abu Sufyan said,
     Caesar's messenger found us somewhere in
     Sham so he took me and my companions to Ilya
     and we were admitted into Ceasar's court to find
     him sitting in his royal court wearing a crown and
     surrounded by the senior dignitaries of the
     Byzantine. He said to his translator. 'Ask them
     who amongst them is a close relation to the man
     who claims to be a prophet." Abu Sufyan added,
     "I replied, 'I am the nearest relative to him.' He
     asked, 'What degree of relationship do you have
     with him?' I replied, 'He is my cousin,' and there
     was none of Bani Abu Manaf in the caravan
     except myself. Caesar said, 'Let him come
     nearer.' He then ordered that my companions
     stand behind me near my shoulder and said to his
     translator, 'Tell his companions that I am going to
     ask this man about the man who claims to be a
     prophet. If he tells a lie, they should contradict
     him immediately." Abu Sufyan added, "By Allah !
     Had it not been shameful that my companions
     label me a liar, I would not have spoken the truth
     about him when he asked me. But I considered it
     shameful to be called a liar by my companions.
     So I told the truth. He then said to his translator,
     'Ask him what kind of family does he belong to.'
     I replied, 'He belongs to a noble family amongst
     us.' He said, 'Have anybody else amongst you
     ever claimed the same before him? 'I replied,
     'No.' He said, 'Had you ever blamed him for
     telling lies before he claimed what he claimed? ' I
     replied, 'No.' He said, 'Was anybody amongst
     his ancestors a king?' I replied, 'No.' He said,
     "Do the noble or the poor follow him?' I replied,
     'It is the poor who follow him.' He said, 'Are they
     increasing or decreasing (day by day)?' I replied,'
     They are increasing.' He said, 'Does anybody
     amongst those who embrace his (the Prophet's)
     Religion become displeased and then discard his
     Religion?'. I replied, 'No. ' He said, 'Does he
     break his promises? I replied, 'No, but we are
     now at truce with him and we are afraid that he
     may betray us." Abu Sufyan added, "Other than
     the last sentence, I could not say anything against
     him. Caesar then asked, 'Have you ever had a
     war with him?' I replied, 'Yes.' He said, 'What
     was the outcome of your battles with him?' I
     replied, 'The result was unstable; sometimes he
     was victorious and sometimes we.' He said,
     'What does he order you to do?' I said, 'He tells
     us to worship Allah alone, and not to worship
     others along with Him, and to leave all that our
     fore-fathers used to worship. He orders us to
     pray, give in charity, be chaste, keep promises
     and return what is entrusted to us.' When I had
     said that, Caesar said to his translator, 'Say to
     him: I ask you about his lineage and your reply
     was that he belonged to a noble family. In fact,
     all the apostles came from the noblest lineage of
     their nations. Then I questioned you whether
     anybody else amongst you had claimed such a
     thing, and your reply was in the negative. If the
     answer had been in the affirmative, I would have
     thought that this man was following a claim that
     had been said before him. When I asked you
     whether he was ever blamed for telling lies, your
     reply was in the negative, so I took it for granted
     that a person who did not tell a lie about (others)
     the people could never tell a lie about Allah.
     Then I asked you whether any of his ancestors
     was a king. Your reply was in the negative, and if
     it had been in the affirmative, I would have
     thought that this man wanted to take back his
     ancestral kingdom. When I asked you whether
     the rich or the poor people followed him, you
     replied that it was the poor who followed him. In
     fact, such are the followers of the apostles. Then
     I asked you whether his followers were
     increasing or decreasing. You replied that they
     were increasing. In fact, this is the result of true
     faith till it is complete (in all respects). I asked
     you whether there was anybody who, after
     embracing his religion, became displeased and
     discarded his religion; your reply was in the
     negative. In fact, this is the sign of true faith, for
     when its cheerfulness enters and mixes in the
     hearts completely, nobody will be displeased
     with it. I asked you whether he had ever broken
     his promise. You replied in the negative. And
     such are the apostles; they never break their
     promises. When I asked you whether you fought
     with him and he fought with you, you replied that
     he did, and that sometimes he was victorious and
     sometimes you. Indeed, such are the apostles;
     they are put to trials and the final victory is
     always theirs. Then I asked you what he ordered
     you. You replied that he ordered you to worship
     Allah alone and not to worship others along with
     Him, to leave all that your fore-fathers used to
     worship, to offer prayers, to speak the truth, to
     be chaste, to keep promises, and to return what
     is entrusted to you. These are really the qualities
     of a prophet who, I knew (from the previous
     Scriptures) would appear, but I did not know
     that he would be from amongst you. If what you
     say should be true, he will very soon occupy the
     earth under my feet, and if I knew that I would
     reach him definitely, I would go immediately to
     meet Him; and were I with him, then I would
     certainly wash his feet.' " Abu Sufyan added,
     "Caesar then asked for the letter of Allah's
     Apostle and it was read. Its contents were:-- 

     "In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the
     most Merciful (This letter is) from Muhammad,
     the slave of Allah, and His Apostle, to
     Heraculius, the Ruler of the Byzantine. Peace be
     upon the followers of guidance. Now then, I
     invite you to Islam (i.e. surrender to Allah),
     embrace Islam and you will be safe; embrace
     Islam and Allah will bestow on you a double
     reward. But if you reject this invitation of Islam,
     you shall be responsible for misguiding the
     peasants (i.e. your nation). O people of the
     Scriptures! Come to a word common to you and
     us and you, that we worship. None but Allah,
     and that we associate nothing in worship with
     Him; and that none of us shall take others as
     Lords besides Allah. Then if they turn away, say:
     Bear witness that we are (they who have
     surrendered (unto Him)..(3.64) 

     Abu Sufyan added, "When Heraclius had
     finished his speech, there was a great hue and cry
     caused by the Byzantine Royalties surrounding
     him, and there was so much noise that I did not
     understand what they said. So, we were turned
     out of the court. When I went out with my
     companions and we were alone, I said to them,
     'Verily, Ibn Abi Kabsha's (i.e. the Prophet's)
     affair has gained power. This is the King of Bani
     Al-Asfar fearing him." Abu Sufyan added, "By
     Allah, I remained low and was sure that his
     religion would be victorious till Allah converted
     me to Islam, though I disliked it " 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 192: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     That he heard the Prophet on the day (of the
     battle) of Khaibar saying, "I will give the flag to a
     person at whose hands Allah will grant victory."
     So, the companions of the Prophet got up,
     wishing eagerly to see to whom the flag will be
     given, and everyone of them wished to be given
     the flag. But the Prophet asked for 'Ali. Someone
     informed him that he was suffering from
     eye-trouble. So, he ordered them to bring 'Ali in
     front of him. Then the Prophet spat in his eyes
     and his eyes were cured immediately as if he had
     never any eye-trouble. 'Ali said, "We will fight
     with them (i.e. infidels) till they become like us
     (i.e. Muslims)." The Prophet said, "Be patient, till
     you face them and invite them to Islam and
     inform them of what Allah has enjoined upon
     them. By Allah! If a single person embraces
     Islam at your hands (i.e. through you), that will
     be better for you than the red camels." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 193: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle attacked some
     people, he would never attack them till it was
     dawn. If he heard the Adhan (i.e. call for prayer)
     he would delay the fight, and if he did not hear
     the Adhan, he would attack them immediately
     after dawn. We reached Khaibar at night. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 194: 

     Narrated Anas: as Hadith No. 193 above. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 195: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet set out for Khaibar and reached it
     at night. He used not to attack if he reached the
     people at night, till the day broke. So, when the
     day dawned, the Jews came out with their bags
     and spades. When they saw the Prophet; they
     said, "Muhammad and his army!" The Prophet
     said, Allahu--Akbar! (Allah is Greater) and
     Khaibar is ruined, for whenever we approach a
     nation (i.e. enemy to fight) then it will be a
     miserable morning for those who have been
     warned." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 196: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah 's Apostle said, " I have been ordered to
     fight with the people till they say, 'None has the
     right to be worshipped but Allah,' and whoever
     says, 'None has the right to be worshipped but
     Allah,' his life and property will be saved by me
     except for Islamic law, and his accounts will be
     with Allah, (either to punish him or to forgive
     him.)" 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 197: 

     Narrated Ka'b bin Malik: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to lead a
     Ghazwa, he would use an equivocation from
     which one would understand that he was going to
     a different destination . 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 198: 

     Narrated Ka'b bin Malik: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to carry out
     a Ghazwa, he would use an equivocation to
     conceal his real destination till it was the Ghazwa
     of Tabuk which Allah's Apostle carried out in
     very hot weather. As he was going to face a very
     long journey through a wasteland and was to
     meet and attack a large number of enemies. So,
     he made the situation clear to the Muslims so that
     they might prepare themselves accordingly and
     get ready to conquer their enemy. The Prophet
     informed them of the destination he was heading
     for (Ka'b bin Malik used to say, "Scarcely did
     Allah's Apostle set out for a journey on a day
     other than Thursday.") 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 199: 

     Narrated Ka'b bin Malik: 

     The Prophet set out on Thursday for the Ghazwa
     of Tabuk and he used to prefer to set out (i.e.
     travel) on Thursdays. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 200: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet offered a four-Rak'at Zuhr prayer at
     Medina and then offered a two Rak'at 'Asr
     prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa and I heard the
     companions of the Prophet reciting Talbiya aloud
     (for Hajj and 'Umra) altogether. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 201: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We set out in the company of Allah's Apostle
     five days before the end of Dhul Qa'da intending
     to perform Hajj only. When we approached
     Mecca Allah's Apostle ordered those who did
     not have the Hadi (i.e. an animal for sacrifice)
     with them, to perform the Tawaf around the
     Ka'ba, and between Safa and Marwa and then
     finish their Ihram. Beef was brought to us on the
     day of (i.e. the days of slaughtering) and I asked,
     "What is this?" Somebody said, Allah's Apostle
     has slaughtered (a cow) on behalf of his wives." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 202: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once the Prophet set out in the month of
     Ramadan. He observed fasting till he reached a
     place called Kadid where he broke his fast. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 203: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The 'Prophet said, "It is obligatory for one to
     listen to and obey (the ruler's orders) unless these
     orders involve one disobedience (to Allah); but if
     an act of disobedience (to Allah) is imposed, he
     should not listen to or obey it." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 204: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     That heard Allah's Apostle saying, "We are the
     last but will be the foremost to enter Paradise)."
     The Prophet added, "He who obeys me, obeys
     Allah, and he who disobeys me, disobeys Allah.
     He who obeys the chief, obeys me, and he who
     disobeys the chief, disobeys me. The Imam is
     like a shelter for whose safety the Muslims
     should fight and where they should seek
     protection. If the Imam orders people with
     righteousness and rules justly, then he will be
     rewarded for that, and if he does the opposite,
     he will be responsible for that." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 205: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     When we reached (Hudaibiya) in the next year
     (of the treaty of Hudaibiya), not even two men
     amongst us agreed unanimously as to which was
     the tree under which we had given the pledge of
     allegiance, and that was out of Allah's Mercy.
     (The sub narrator asked Naf'i, "For what did the
     Prophet take their pledge of allegiance, was it for
     death?" Naf'i replied "No, but he took their
     pledge of allegiance for patience.") 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 206: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid: 

     that in the time (of the battle) of Al-Harra a
     person came to him and said, "Ibn Hanzala is
     taking the pledge of allegiance from the people
     for death." He said, "I will never give a pledge of
     allegiance for such a thing to anyone after Allah's
     Apostle." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 207: 

     Narrated Yazid bin Ubaid: 

     Salama said, "I gave the Pledge of allegiance
     (Al-Ridwan) to Allah's Apostle and then I moved
     to the shade of a tree. When the number of
     people around the Prophet diminished, he said,
     'O Ibn Al-Akwa ! Will you not give to me the
     pledge of Allegiance?' I replied, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! I have already given to you the pledge
     of Allegiance.' He said, 'Do it again.' So I gave
     the pledge of allegiance for the second time." I
     asked 'O Abu Muslim! For what did you give he
     pledge of Allegiance on that day?" He replied,
     "We gave the pledge of Allegiance for death." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 208: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     On the day (of the battle) of the Trench, the
     Ansar were saying, "We are those who have
     sworn allegiance to Muhammad for Jihaid (for
     ever) as long as we live." The Prophet replied to
     them, "O Allah! There is no life except the life of
     the Hereafter. So honor the Ansar and emigrants
     with Your Generosity." 

     And Narrated Mujashi: My brother and I came
     to the Prophet and I requested him to take the
     pledge of allegiance from us for migration. He
     said, "Migration has passed away with its
     people." I asked, "For what will you take the
     pledge of allegiance from us then?" He said, "I
     will take (the pledge) for Islam and Jihad." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 209: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     Today a man came to me and asked me a
     question which I did not know how to answer.
     He said, "Tell me, if a wealthy active man,
     well-equipped with arms, goes out on military
     expeditions with our chiefs, and orders us to do
     such things as we cannot do (should we obey
     him?)" I replied, "By Allah, I do not know what
     to reply you, except that we, were in the
     company of the Prophet and he used to order us
     to do a thing once only till we finished it. And no
     doubt, everyone among you will remain in a good
     state as long as he obeys Allah. If one is in doubt
     as to the legality of something, he should ask
     somebody who would satisfy him, but soon will
     come a time when you will not find such a man.
     By Him, except Whom none has the right to be
     worshipped. I see that the example of what has
     passed of this life (to what remains thereof) is like
     a pond whose fresh water has been used up and
     nothing remains but muddy water." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 210: 

     Narrated Salim Abu An-Nadr: 

     The freed slave of 'Umar bin 'Ubaidullah who
     was 'Umar's clerk: 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa wrote
     him (i.e. 'Umar) a letter that contained the
     following:-- 

     "Once Allah's Apostle (during a holy battle),
     waited till the sun had declined and then he got
     up among the people and said, "O people! Do
     not wish to face the enemy (in a battle) and ask
     Allah to save you (from calamities) but if you
     should face the enemy, then be patient and let it
     be known to you that Paradise is under the
     shades of swords." He then said,, "O Allah! The
     Revealer of the (Holy) Book, the Mover of the
     clouds, and Defeater of Al-Ahzab (i.e. the clans
     of infidels), defeat them infidels and bestow
     victory upon us." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 211: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     I participated in a Ghazwa along with Allah's
     Apostle The Prophet met me (on the way) while
     I was riding a camel of ours used for irrigation
     and it had got so tired that it could hardly walk.
     The Prophet asked me, "What is wrong with the
     camel?" I replied, "It has got tired." So. Allah's
     Apostle came from behind it and rebuked it and
     prayed for it so it started surpassing the other
     camels and going ahead of them. Then he asked
     me, "How do you find your camel (now)?" I
     replied, "I find it quite well, now as it has
     received your blessings." He said, "Will you sell it
     to me?" I felt shy (to refuse his offer) though it
     was the only camel for irrigation we had. So, I
     said, "Yes." He said, "Sell it to me then." I sold it
     to him on the condition that I should keep on
     riding it till I reached Medina. Then I said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I am a bridegroom," and
     requested him to allow me to go home. He
     allowed me, and I set out for Medina before the
     people till I reached Medina, where I met my
     uncle, who asked me about the camel and I
     informed him all about it and he blamed me for
     that. When I took the permission of Allah's
     Apostle he asked me whether I had married a
     virgin or a matron and I replied that I had
     married a matron. He said, "Why hadn't you
     married a virgin who would have played with
     you, and you would have played with her?" I
     replied, "O Allah's Apostle! My father died (or
     was martyred) and I have some young sisters, so
     I felt it not proper that I should marry a young girl
     like them who would neither teach them manners
     nor serve them. So, I have married a matron so
     that she may serve them and teach them
     manners." When Allah's Apostle arrived in
     Medina, I took the camel to him the next morning
     and he gave me its price and gave me the camel
     itself as well. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 212: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once there was a feeling of fright at Medina, so
     Allah's Apostle rode a horse belonging to Abu
     Talha and (on his return) he said, "We have not
     seen anything (fearful), but we found this horse
     very fast." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 213: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once the people got frightened, so Allah's
     Apostle rode a slow horse belonging to Abu
     Talha, and he set out all alone, making the horse
     gallop. Then the people rode, making their
     horses gallop after him. On his return he said,
     "Don't be afraid (there is nothing to be afraid of)
     (and I have found) this horse a very fast one."
     That horse was never excelled in running hence
     forward. (Qastalani Vol. 5) 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 214: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     I gave a horse to be used in Allah's Cause, but
     later on I saw it being sold. I asked the Prophet
     whether I could buy it. He said, "Don't buy it and
     don't take back your gift of charity." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 215: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     'Umar gave a horse to be used in Allah's Cause,
     but later on he found it being sold. So, he
     intended to buy it and asked Allah's Apostle who
     said, "Don't buy it and don't take back your gift
     of charity." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 216: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Were it not for the fear that
     it would be difficult for my followers, I would not
     have remained behind any Sariya, (army-unit) but
     I don't have riding camels and have no other
     means of conveyance to carry them on, and it is
     hard for me that my companions should remain
     behind me. No doubt I wish I could fight in
     Allah's Cause and be martyred and come to life
     again to be martyred and come to life once
     more." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 217: 

     Narrated Yali: 

     I participated in the Ghazwa of Tabuk along with
     Allah's Apostle and I gave a young camel to be
     ridden in Jihad and that was, to me, one of my
     best deeds. Then I employed a laborer who
     quarrelled with another person. One of them bit
     the hand of the other and the latter drew his hand
     from the mouth of the former pulling out his front
     tooth. Then the former instituted a suit against the
     latter before the Prophet who rejected that suit
     saying, "Do you expect him to put out his hand
     for you to snap as a male camel snaps
     (vegetation)?" 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 218: 

     Narrated Tha'laba bin Abi Malik Al-Qurazi: 

     When Qais bin Sad Al-Ansari, who used to
     carry the flag of the Prophet, intended to perform
     Hajj, he combed his hair. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 219c: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     Ali remained behind the Prophet during the battle
     of Khaibar as he way suffering from some eye
     trouble but then he said, "How should I stay
     behind Allah's Apostle?" So, he set out till he
     joined the Prophet. On the eve of the day of the
     conquest of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle said, "(No
     doubt) I will give the flag or, tomorrow, a man
     whom Allah and His Apostle love or who loves
     Allah and His apostle will take the flag. Allah will
     bestow victory upon him." Suddenly 'Ali joined
     us though we were not expecting him. The
     people said, "Here is 'Ali. "So, Allah's Apostle
     gave the flag to him and Allah bestowed victory
     upon him. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 219n: 

     Narrated Nafi bin Jubair: 

     I heard Al Abbas telling Az-Zubair, "The
     Prophet ordered you to fix the flag here." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 220: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "I have been sent with the
     shortest expressions bearing the widest
     meanings, and I have been made victorious with
     terror (cast in the hearts of the enemy), and while
     I was sleeping, the keys of the treasures of the
     world were brought to me and put in my hand."
     Abu Huraira added: Allah's Apostle has left the
     world and now you, people, are bringing out
     those treasures (i.e. the Prophet did not benefit
     by them). 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 221: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Abu Sufyan said, "Heraclius sent for me when I
     was in 'llya' (i.e. Jerusalem). Then he asked for
     the letter of Allah's Apostle and when he had
     finished its reading there was a great hue and cry
     around him and the voices grew louder and we
     were asked to quit the place. When we were
     turned out, I said to my companions, 'The cause
     of Ibn Abi Kabsha has become conspicuous as
     the King of Bani Al-Asfar is afraid of him.' " 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 222: 

     Narrated Asma: 

     I prepared the journey-food for Allah's Apostle
     in Abu Bakr's house when he intended to
     emigrate to Medina. I could not find anything to
     tie the food-container and the water skin with.
     So, I said to Abu Bakr, "By Allah, I do not find
     anything to tie (these things) with except my waist
     belt." He said, "Cut it into two pieces and tie the
     water-skin with one piece and the food-container
     with the other (the sub-narrator added, "She did
     accordingly and that was the reason for calling
     her Dhatun-Nitaqain (i.e. two-belted woman))." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 223: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     During the life-time of the Prophet we used to
     take the meat of sacrificed animals (as journey
     food) to Medina. (See Hadith No. 474 Vol. 7) 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 224: 

     Narrated Suwaid bin An-Nu'man: 

     That he went out in the company o; the Prophet
     during the year of Khaibar (campaign till they
     reached a place called As-Sahba', the lower part
     of Khaibar. They offered the 'Asr prayer (there)
     and the Prophet asked for the food. Nothing but
     Sawiq was brought to the Prophet. So, they
     chewed it and ate it and drank water. After that
     the Prophet got up, washed his mouth, and they
     too washed their mouths and then offered the
     prayer. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 225: 

     Narrated Salama: 

     Once the journey-food of the people ran short
     and they were in great need. So, they came to
     the Prophet to take his permission for
     slaughtering their camels, and he permitted them.
     Then 'Umar met them and they informed him
     about it. He said, "What will sustain you after
     your camels (are finished)?" Then 'Umar went to
     the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! What
     will sustain them after their camels (are
     finished)?" Allah's Apostle said, "Make an
     announcement amongst the people that they
     should bring all their remaining food (to me)."
     (They brought it and) the Prophet invoked Allah
     and asked for His Blessings for it. Then he asked
     them to bring their food utensils and the people
     started filling their food utensils with their hands
     till they were satisfied. Allah's Apostle then said,
     "I testify that None has the right to be
     worshipped but Allah, and I am His Apostle. " 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 226: 

     Narrated Wahb bin Kaisan: 

     Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, "We set out, and we
     were three-hundred men carrying our
     journey-food on our shoulders. Then we began
     to eat a single date each per day." A man asked
     (Jabir), "O Abu 'Abdullah! How could a person
     be satisfied with a single date?" Jabir replied,
     "We realized the value of that one date when we
     could not even have that much till we reached the
     sea-shore, when all of a sudden we saw a huge
     fish cast by the sea. So, we ate of it as much as
     we wished for eighteen days." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 227: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     That she said, "O Allah's Apostle! Your
     companions are returning with the reward of both
     Hajj and 'Umra, while I am returning with (the
     reward of) Hajj only." He said to her, "Go, and
     let 'Abdur-Rahman (i.e. your brother) make you
     sit behind him (on the animal)." So, he ordered
     'AbdurRahman to let her perform 'Umra from
     Al-Tan'im. Then the Prophet waited for her at
     the higher region of Mecca till she returned. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 228: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr
     As-Siddiq: 

     The Prophet ordered me to let 'Aisha sit behind
     me (on the animal) and to let her perform 'Umra
     from At-Tan'im. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 229: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I was riding behind Abu Talha (on the same)
     riding animal) and (the Prophet's companions)
     were reciting Talbiya aloud for both Hajj and
     'Umra. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 230: 

     Narrated 'Urwa from Usama bin Zaid: 

     Allah's Apostle rode a donkey on which there
     was a saddle covered by a velvet sheet and let
     Usama ride behind him (on the donkey). 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 231: 

     Narrated Nafi from 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle came to Mecca through its higher
     region on the day of the Conquest (of Mecca)
     riding his she-camel on which Usama was riding
     behind him. Bilal and 'Uthman bin Talha, one of
     the servants of the Ka'ba, were also
     accompanying him till he made his camel kneel in
     the mosque and ordered the latter to bring the
     key of the Ka'ba. He opened the door of the
     Ka'ba and Allah's Apostle entered in the
     company of Usama, Bilal and 'Uthman, and
     stayed in it for a long period. When he came out,
     the people rushed to it, and 'Abdullah bin 'Umar
     was the first to enter it and found Bilal standing
     behind the door. He asked Bilal, "Where did the
     Prophet offer his prayer?" He pointed to the
     place where he had offered his prayer. 'Abdullah
     said, "I forgot to ask him how many Rakat he
     had performed." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 232: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There is a (compulsory)
     Sadaqa (charity) to be given for every joint of the
     human body (as a sign of gratitude to Allah)
     everyday the sun rises. To judge justly between
     two persons is regarded as Sadaqa, and to help
     a man concerning his riding animal by helping him
     to ride it or by lifting his luggage on to it, is also
     regarded as Sadaqa, and (saying) a good word
     is also Sadaqa, and every step taken on one's
     way to offer the compulsory prayer (in the
     mosque) is also Sadaqa and to remove a harmful
     thing from the way is also Sadaqa." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 233: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the people to travel to a
     hostile country carrying (copies of) the Quran. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 234: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet reached Khaibar in the morning,
     while the people were coming out carrying their
     spades over their shoulders. When they saw him
     they said, "This is Muhammad and his army!
     Muhammad and his army!" So, they took refuge
     in the fort. The Prophet raised both his hands and
     said, "Allahu Akbar, Khaibar is ruined, for when
     we approach a nation (i.e. enemy to fight) then
     miserable is the morning of the warned ones."
     Then we found some donkeys which we (killed
     and) cooked: The announcer of the Prophet
     announced: "Allah and His Apostle forbid you to
     eat donkey's meat." So, all the pots including
     their contents were turned upside down. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 235: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari: 

     We were in the company of Allah's Apostle
     (during Hajj). Whenever we went up a high place
     we used to say: "None has the right to be
     worshipped but Allah, and Allah is Greater," and
     our voices used to rise, so the Prophet said, "O
     people! Be merciful to yourselves (i.e. don't raise
     your voice), for you are not calling a deaf or an
     absent one, but One Who is with you, no doubt
     He is All-Hearer, ever Near (to all things)." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 236: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Whenever we went up a place we would say,
     "Allahu--Akbar (i.e. Allah is Greater)", and
     whenever we went down a place we would say,
     "Subhan Allah." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 237: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Whenever we went up a place we would say
     Takbir, and whenever we went down we would
     say, "Subhan Allah." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 238: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Whenever the Prophet returned from the Hajj or
     the 'Umra or a Ghazwa, he would say Takbir
     thrice. Whenever he came upon a mountain path
     or wasteland, and then he would say, "None has
     the right to be worshipped but Allah, Alone Who
     has no partner. All the Kingdom belongs to Him
     and all the praises are for Him and He is
     Omnipotent. We are returning with repentance,
     worshipping, prostrating ourselves and praising
     our Lord. Allah fulfilled His Promise, granted
     victory to His slave and He Alone defeated all
     the clans." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 239: 

     Narrated Ibrahim Abu Isma'il As-Saksaki: 

     I heard Abu Burda who accompanied Yazid bin
     Abi Kabsha on a journey. Yazid used to observe
     fasting on journeys. Abu Burda said to him, "I
     heard Abu Musa several times saying that Allah's
     Apostle said, 'When a slave falls ill or travels,
     then he will get reward similar to that he gets for
     good deeds practiced at home when in good
     health." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 240: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     On the day of the battle of the Trench, the
     Prophet wanted somebody from amongst the
     people to volunteer to be a reconnoitre.
     Az-Zubair volunteered. He demanded the same
     again and Az-Zubair volunteered again. Then he
     repeated the same demand (thrice) and AzZubair
     volunteered once more. The Prophet then said, "
     Every prophet has a disciple and my disciple is
     Az-Zubair." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 241: 

     Narrated Ibn' Umar: 

     from the Prophet the following Hadith (No. 242).


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 242: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "If the people knew what I
     know about traveling alone, then nobody would
     travel alone at night." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 243: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     Usama bin Zaid was asked at what pace the
     Prophet rode during Hajjat-ul-Wada' "He rode
     at a medium pace, but when he came upon an
     open way he would go at full pace." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 244: 

     Narrated Aslam: 

     While I was in the company of 'Abdullah bin
     'Umar on the way to Mecca, he received the
     news of the severe illness of Safiya bint Abi
     Ubaid (i.e. his wife), so he proceeded at greater
     speed, and when the twilight disappeared, he
     dismounted and offered the Maghrib and 'Isha
     'prayers together and said, " I saw the Prophet
     delaying the Maghrib prayer to offer it along with
     the 'Isha' when he was in a hurry on a journey." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 245: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Journey is a piece of
     torture, for it disturbs one's sleep, eating and
     drinking. So, when you fulfill your job, you
     should hurry up to your family." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 246: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Umar bin Al-Khattab gave a horse to be ridden
     in Allah's Cause and then he found it being sold.
     He intended to purchase it. So, he consulted
     Allah's Apostle who said, "Don't buy it and don't
     take back your gift of charity." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 247: 

     Narrated Aslam: 

     I heard 'Umar bin Al-Khattab saying, "I gave a
     horse to be ridden in Allah's Cause and the
     person who got it intended to sell it or neglected
     it. So, I wanted to buy it as I thought he would
     sell it cheap. I consulted the Prophet who said,
     "Do not buy it even if for one Dirham, because
     he who takes back his gift is like a dog
     swallowing its vomit." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 248: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     A man came to the Prophet asking his permission
     to take part in Jihad. The Prophet asked him,
     "Are your parents alive?" He replied in the
     affirmative. The Prophet said to him, "Then exert
     yourself in their service." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 249: 

     Narrated Abu Bashir Al-Ansari: 

     That he was in the company of Allah's Apostle
     on some of his journeys. (The sub-narrator
     'Abdullah adds, "I think that Abu Bashir also
     said, 'And the people were at their sleeping
     places.") Allah's Apostle sent a messenger
     ordering: "There shall not remain any necklace of
     string or any other kind of necklace round the
     necks of camels except it is cut off." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 250: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     That he heard the Prophet saying, "It is not
     permissible for a man to be alone with a woman,
     and no lady should travel except with a Muhram
     (i.e. her husband or a person whom she cannot
     marry in any case for ever; e.g. her father,
     brother, etc.)." Then a man got up and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I have enlisted in the army for
     such-and-such Ghazwa and my wife is
     proceeding for Hajj." Allah's Apostle said, "Go,
     and perform the Hajj with your wife." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 251: 

     Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin Abi Rafi: 

     I heard 'Ali saying, "Allah's Apostle sent me,
     Az-Zubair and Al-Miqdad somewhere saying,
     'Proceed till you reach Rawdat Khakh. There
     you will find a lady with a letter. Take the letter
     from her.' " So, we set out and our horses ran at
     full pace till we got at Ar-Rawda where we
     found the lady and said (to her). "Take out the
     letter." She replied, "I have no letter with me."
     We said, "Either you take out the letter or else
     we will take off your clothes." So, she took it out
     of her braid. We brought the letter to Allah's
     Apostle and it contained a statement from Hatib
     bin Abi Balta a to some of the Meccan pagans
     informing them of some of the intentions of
     Allah's Apostle. Then Allah's Apostle said, "O
     Hatib! What is this?" Hatib replied, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Don't hasten to give your judgment
     about me. I was a man closely connected with
     the Quraish, but I did not belong to this tribe,
     while the other emigrants with you, had their
     relatives in Mecca who would protect their
     dependents and property . So, I wanted to
     recompense for my lacking blood relation to
     them by doing them a favor so that they might
     protect my dependents. I did this neither because
     of disbelief not apostasy nor out of preferring
     Kufr (disbelief) to Islam." Allah's Apostle, said,
     "Hatib has told you the truth." Umar said, O
     Allah's Apostle! Allow me to chop off the head
     of this hypocrite." Allah's Apostle said, "Hatib
     participated in the battle of Badr, and who
     knows, perhaps Allah has already looked at the
     Badr warriors and said, 'Do whatever you like,
     for I have forgiven you." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 252: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     When it was the day (of the battle) of Badr,
     prisoners of war were brought including
     Al-Abbas who was undressed. The Prophet
     looked for a shirt for him. It was found that the
     shirt of 'Abdullah bin Ubai would do, so the
     Prophet let him wear it. That was the reason why
     the Prophet took off and gave his own shirt to
     'Abdullah. (The narrator adds, "He had done the
     Prophet some favor for which the Prophet liked
     to reward him.") 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 253: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     On the day (of the battle) of Khaibar the Prophet
     said, "Tomorrow I will give the flag to somebody
     who will be given victory (by Allah) and who
     loves Allah and His Apostle and is loved by
     Allah and His Apostle." So, the people
     wondered all that night as to who would receive
     the flag and in the morning everyone hoped that
     he would be that person. Allah's Apostle asked,
     "Where is 'Ali?" He was told that 'Ali was
     suffering from eye-trouble, so he applied saliva to
     his eyes and invoked Allah to cure him. He at
     once got cured as if he had no ailment. The
     Prophet gave him the flag. 'Ali said, "Should I
     fight them till they become like us (i.e. Muslim)?"
     The Prophet said, "Go to them patiently and
     calmly till you enter the land. Then, invite them to
     Islam, and inform them what is enjoined upon
     them, for, by Allah, if Allah gives guidance to
     somebody through you, it is better for you than
     possessing red camels." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 254: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah wonders at those
     people who will enter Paradise in chains." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 255: 

     Narrated Abu Burda's father: 

     The Prophet said, "Three persons will get their
     reward twice. (One is) a person who has a slave
     girl and he educates her properly and teaches her
     good manners properly (without violence) and
     then manumits and marries her. Such a person
     will get a double reward. (Another is) a believer
     from the people of the scriptures who has been a
     true believer and then he believes in the Prophet
     (Muhammad). Such a person will get a double
     reward. (The third is) a slave who observes
     Allah's Rights and Obligations and is sincere to
     his master." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 256: 

     Narrated As-Sab bin Jaththama: 

     The Prophet passed by me at a place called
     Al-Abwa or Waddan, and was asked whether it
     was permissible to attack the pagan warriors at
     night with the probability of exposing their
     women and children to danger. The Prophet
     replied, "They (i.e. women and children) are from
     them (i.e. pagans)." I also heard the Prophet
     saying, "The institution of Hima is invalid except
     for Allah and His Apostle." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 257: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     During some of the Ghazawat of the Prophet a
     woman was found killed. Allah's Apostle
     disapproved the killing of women and children. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 258: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     During some of the Ghazawat of Allah's Apostle
     a woman was found killed, so Allah's Apostle
     forbade the killing of women and children. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 259: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle sent us in a mission (i.e. am
     army-unit) and said, "If you find so-and-so and
     so-and-so, burn both of them with fire." When
     we intended to depart, Allah's Apostle said, "I
     have ordered you to burn so-and-so and
     so-and-so, and it is none but Allah Who punishes
     with fire, so, if you find them, kill them." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 260: 

     Narrated Ikrima: 

     Ali burnt some people and this news reached Ibn
     'Abbas, who said, "Had I been in his place I
     would not have burnt them, as the Prophet said,
     'Don't punish (anybody) with Allah's Punishment.'
     No doubt, I would have killed them, for the
     Prophet said, 'If somebody (a Muslim) discards
     his religion, kill him.' " 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 261: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     A group of eight men from the tribe of 'Ukil came
     to the Prophet and then they found the climate of
     Medina unsuitable for them. So, they said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Provide us with some milk."
     Allah's Apostle said, "I recommend that you
     should join the herd of camels." So they went
     and drank the urine and the milk of the camels
     (as a medicine) till they became healthy and fat.
     Then they killed the shepherd and drove away
     the camels, and they became unbelievers after
     whey were Muslims. When the Prophet was
     informed by a shouter for help, he sent some men
     in their pursuit, and before the sun rose high, they
     were brought, and he had their hands and feet
     cut off. Then he ordered for nails which were
     heated and passed over their eyes, and whey
     were left in the Harra (i.e. rocky land in Medina).
     They asked for water, and nobody provided
     them with water till they died (Abu Qilaba, a
     sub-narrator said, "They committed murder and
     theft and fought against Allah and His Apostle,
     and spread evil in the land.") 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 262: 

     Narrated Jarir: 

     Allah's Apostles said to me, "Will you relieve me
     from Dhul-Khalasa? Dhul-Khalasa was a house
     (of an idol) belonging to the tribe of Khath'am
     called Al-Ka'ba Al-Yama-niya. So, I proceeded
     with one hundred and fifty cavalry men from the
     tribe of Ahmas, who were excellent knights. It
     happened that I could not sit firm on horses, so
     the Prophet , stroke me over my chest till I saw
     his finger-marks over my chest, he said, 'O
     Allah! Make him firm and make him a guiding
     and rightly guided man.' " Jarir proceeded
     towards that house, and dismantled and burnt it.
     Then he sent a messenger to Allah's Apostle
     informing him of that. Jarir's messenger said, "By
     Him Who has sent you with the Truth, I did not
     come to you till I had left it like an emancipated
     or gabby camel (i.e. completely marred and
     spoilt)." Jarir added, "The Prophet asked for
     Allah's Blessings for the horses and the men of
     Ahmas five times." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 263: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet burnt the date-palms of Bani
     An-Nadir. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 264: 

     Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib: 

     Allah's Apostle sent a group of Ansari men to kill
     Abu-Rafi. One of them set out and entered their
     (i.e. the enemies) fort. That man said, "I hid
     myself in a stable for their animals. They closed
     the fort gate. Later they lost a donkey of theirs,
     so they went out in its search. I, too, went out
     along with them, pretending to look for it. They
     found the donkey and entered their fort. And I,
     too, entered along with them. They closed the
     gate of the fort at night, and kept its keys in a
     small window where I could see them. When
     those people slept, I took the keys and opened
     the gate of the fort and came upon Abu Rafi and
     said, 'O Abu Rafi. When he replied me, I
     proceeded towards the voice and hit him. He
     shouted and I came out to come back,
     pretending to be a helper. I said, 'O Abu Rafi,
     changing the tone of my voice. He asked me,
     'What do you want; woe to your mother?' I
     asked him, 'What has happened to you?' He
     said, 'I don't know who came to me and hit me.'
     Then I drove my sword into his belly and pushed
     it forcibly till it touched the bone. Then I came
     out, filled with puzzlement and went towards a
     ladder of theirs in order to get down but I fell
     down and sprained my foot. I came to my
     companions and said, 'I will not leave till I hear
     the wailing of the women.' So, I did not leave till
     I heard the women bewailing Abu Rafi, the
     merchant pf Hijaz. Then I got up, feeling no
     ailment, (and we proceeded) till we came upon
     the Prophet and informed him." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 265: 

     Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib: 

     Allah's Apostle sent a group of the Ansar to Abu
     Rafi. Abdullah bin Atik entered his house at night
     and killed him while he was sleeping. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 266l: 

     Narrated Salim Abu An-Nadr: 

     (the freed slave of 'Umar bin 'Ubaidullah) I was
     Umar's clerk. Once Abdullah bin Abi Aufa wrote
     a letter to 'Umar when he proceeded to
     Al-Haruriya. I read in it that Allah's Apostle in
     one of his military expeditions against the enemy,
     waited till the sun declined and then he got up
     amongst the people saying, "O people! Do not
     wish to meet the enemy, and ask Allah for safety,
     but when you face the enemy, be patient, and
     remember that Paradise is under the shades of
     swords." Then he said, "O Allah, the Revealer of
     the Holy Book, and the Mover of the clouds and
     the Defeater of the clans, defeat them, and grant
     us victory over them." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 266c: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said: "Do not wish to meet the
     enemy, but when you meet face) the enemy, be
     patient." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 267: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Khosrau will be ruined, and
     there will be no Khosrau after him, and Caesar
     will surely be ruined and there will be no Caesar
     after him, and you will spend their treasures in
     Allah's Cause." He called, "War is deceit'. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 268: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle called,: "War is deceit". 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 269: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "War is deceit." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 270: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "Who is ready to kill Ka'b bin
     Al-Ashraf who has really hurt Allah and His
     Apostle?" Muhammad bin Maslama said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Do you like me to kill him?" He
     replied in the affirmative. So, Muhammad bin
     Maslama went to him (i.e. Ka'b) and said, "This
     person (i.e. the Prophet) has put us to task and
     asked us for charity." Ka'b replied, "By Allah,
     you will get tired of him." Muhammad said to
     him, "We have followed him, so we dislike to
     leave him till we see the end of his affair."
     Muhammad bin Maslama went on talking to him
     in this way till he got the chance to kill him. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 271: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet said, "Who is ready to kill Ka'b bin
     Ashraf (i.e. a Jew)." Muhammad bin Maslama
     replied, "Do you like me to kill him?" The
     Prophet replied in the affirmative. Muhammad
     bin Maslama said, "Then allow me to say what I
     like." The Prophet replied, "I do (i.e. allow you)."


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 272: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle on the day (of the battle) of
     the Trench carrying earth till the hair of his chest
     were covered with dust and he was a hairy man.
     He was reciting the following verses of 'Abdullah
     (bin Rawaha): "O Allah, were it not for You, We
     would not have been guided, Nor would we
     have given in charity, nor prayed. So, bestow on
     us calmness, and when we meet the enemy. Then
     make our feet firm, for indeed, Yet if they want
     to put us in affliction, (i.e. want to fight against us)
     we would not (flee but withstand them)." The
     Prophet used to raise his voice while reciting
     these verses. (See Hadith No. 432, Vol. 5). 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 273: 

     Narrated Jarir: 

     Allah's Apostle did not screen himself from me
     since my embracing Islam, and whenever he saw
     me he would receive me with a smile. Once I
     told him that I could not sit firm on horses. He
     stroke me on the chest with his hand and said,
     "O Allah! Make him firm and make him a guiding
     and a rightly-guided man." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 274: 

     Narrated Abu Hazim: 

     The people asked Sahl bin Sad As-Sa' idi "With
     what thing (medicine) was the wound of Allah's
     Apostle treated?" He replied, "There is none left
     (living) amongst the people who knows it better
     than. 'Ali used to bring water in his shield and
     Fatima (i.e. the Prophet's daughter) used to wash
     the blood off his face. Then a mat (of palm
     leaves) was burnt and its ash was inserted in the
     wound of Allah's Apostle." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 275: 

     Narrated Abu Burda: 

     That his father said, "The Prophet sent Mu'adh
     and Abu Musa to Yemen telling them. 'Treat the
     people with ease and don't be hard on them; give
     them glad tidings and don't fill them with
     aversion; and love each other, and don't differ." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 276: 

     Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib: 

     The Prophet appointed 'Abdullah bin Jubair as
     the commander of the infantry men (archers) who
     were fifty on the day (of the battle) of Uhud. He
     instructed them, "Stick to your place, and don't
     leave it even if you see birds snatching us, till I
     send for you; and if you see that we have
     defeated the infidels and made them flee, even
     then you should not leave your place till I send
     for you." Then the infidels were defeated. By
     Allah, I saw the women fleeing lifting up their
     clothes revealing their leg-bangles and their legs.
     So, the companions of 'Abdullah bin Jubair said,
     "The booty! O people, the booty ! Your
     companions have become victorious, what are
     you waiting for now?" 'Abdullah bin Jubair said,
     "Have you forgotten what Allah's Apostle said to
     you?" They replied, "By Allah! We will go to the
     people (i.e. the enemy) and collect our share
     from the war booty." But when they went to
     them, they were forced to turn back defeated. At
     that time Allah's Apostle in their rear was calling
     them back. Only twelve men remained with the
     Prophet and the infidels martyred seventy men
     from us. 

     On the day (of the battle) of Badr, the Prophet
     and his companions had caused the 'Pagans to
     lose 140 men, seventy of whom were captured
     and seventy were killed. Then Abu Sufyan asked
     thrice, "Is Muhammad present amongst these
     people?" The Prophet ordered his companions
     not to answer him. Then he asked thrice, "Is the
     son of Abu Quhafa present amongst these
     people?" He asked again thrice, "Is the son of
     Al-Khattab present amongst these people?" He
     then returned to his companions and said, "As for
     these (men), they have been killed." 'Umar could
     not control himself and said (to Abu Sufyan),
     "You told a lie, by Allah! O enemy of Allah! All
     those you have mentioned are alive, and the thing
     which will make you unhappy is still there." Abu
     Sufyan said, "Our victory today is a
     counterbalance to yours in the battle of Badr,
     and in war (the victory) is always undecided and
     is shared in turns by the belligerents, and you will
     find some of your (killed) men mutilated, but I
     did not urge my men to do so, yet I do not feel
     sorry for their deed" After that he started reciting
     cheerfully, "O Hubal, be high! (1) On that the
     Prophet said (to his companions), "Why don't
     you answer him back?" They said, "O Allah's
     Apostle What shall we say?" He said, "Say,
     Allah is Higher and more Sublime." (Then) Abu
     Sufyan said, "We have the (idol) Al Uzza, and
     you have no Uzza." The Prophet said (to his
     companions), "Why don't you answer him
     back?" They asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What
     shall we say?" He said, "Says Allah is our Helper
     and you have no helper." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 277: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle was the (most handsome), most
     generous and the bravest of all the people. Once
     the people of Medina got frightened having heard
     an uproar at night. So, the Prophet met the
     people while he was riding an unsaddled horse
     belonging to Abu Talha and carrying his sword
     (slung over his shoulder). He said (to them),
     "Don't get scared, don't get scared." Then he
     added, "I found it (i.e the horse) very fast." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 278: 

     Narrated Salama: 

     I went out of Medina towards Al-Ghaba. When
     I reached the mountain path of Al-Ghaba, a slave
     of 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf met me. I said to
     him, "Woe to you! What brought you here?" He
     replied, "The she-camels of the Prophet have
     been taken away." I said, "Who took them?" He
     said, "Ghatafan and Fazara." So, I sent three
     cries, "O Sabaha-h ! O Sabahah !" so loudly that
     made the people in between its (i.e. Medina's)
     two mountains hear me. Then I rushed till I met
     them after they had taken the camels away. I
     started throwing arrows at them saying, "I am the
     son of Al-Akwa"; and today perish the mean
     people!" So, I saved the she-camels from them
     before they (i.e. the robbers) could drink water.
     When I returned driving the camels, the Prophet
     met me, I said, "O Allah's Apostle Those people
     are thirsty and I have prevented them from
     drinking water, so send some people to chase
     them." The Prophet said, "O son of Al-Akwa',
     you have gained power (over your enemy), so
     forgive (them). (Besides) those people are now
     being entertained by their folk." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 279: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     A man asked Al-Bara "O Abu 'Umara! Did you
     flee on the day (of the battle) of Hunain?"
     Al-Bara replied while I was listening, "As for
     Allah's Apostle he did not flee on that day. Abu
     Sufyan bin Al-Harith was holding the reins of his
     mule and when the pagans attacked him, he
     dismounted and started saying, 'I am the
     Prophet, and there is no lie about it; I am the son
     of 'Abdul Muttalib.' On that day nobody was
     seen braver than the Prophet 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 280: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri: 

     When the tribe of Bani Quraiza was ready to
     accept Sad's judgment, Allah's Apostle sent for
     Sad who was near to him. Sad came, riding a
     donkey and when he came near, Allah's Apostle
     said (to the Ansar), "Stand up for your leader."
     Then Sad came and sat beside Allah's Apostle
     who said to him. "These people are ready to
     accept your judgment." Sad said, "I give the
     judgment that their warriors should be killed and
     their children and women should be taken as
     prisoners." The Prophet then remarked, "O Sad!
     You have judged amongst them with (or similar
     to) the judgment of the King Allah." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 281: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle sent a Sariya of ten men as spies
     under the leadership of 'Asim bin Thabit
     al-Ansari, the grandfather of 'Asim bin Umar
     Al-Khattab. They proceeded till they reached
     Hadaa, a place between 'Usfan, and Mecca, and
     their news reached a branch of the tribe of
     Hudhail called Bani Lihyan. About two-hundred
     men, who were all archers, hurried to follow their
     tracks till they found the place where they had
     eaten dates they had brought with them from
     Medina. They said, "These are the dates of
     Yathrib (i.e. Medina), "and continued following
     their tracks When 'Asim and his companions saw
     their pursuers, they went up a high place and the
     infidels circled them. The infidels said to them,
     "Come down and surrender, and we promise
     and guarantee you that we will not kill any one of
     you" 'Asim bin Thabit; the leader of the Sariya
     said, "By Allah! I will not come down to be
     under the protection of infidels. O Allah! Convey
     our news to Your Prophet. Then the infidels
     threw arrows at them till they martyred 'Asim
     along with six other men, and three men came
     down accepting their promise and convention,
     and they were Khubaib-al-Ansari and Ibn
     Dathina and another man So, when the infidels
     captured them, they undid the strings of their
     bows and tied them. Then the third (of the
     captives) said, "This is the first betrayal. By
     Allah! I will not go with you. No doubt these,
     namely the martyred, have set a good example to
     us." So, they dragged him and tried to compel
     him to accompany them, but as he refused, they
     killed him. They took Khubaid and Ibn Dathina
     with them and sold them (as slaves) in Mecca
     (and all that took place) after the battle of Badr.
     Khubaib was bought by the sons of Al-Harith bin
     'Amir bin Naufal bin 'Abd Manaf. It was
     Khubaib who had killed Al-Harith bin 'Amir on
     the day (of the battle of) Badr. So, Khubaib
     remained a prisoner with those people. 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: 'Ubaidullah bin 'Iyyad said
     that the daughter of Al-Harith had told him,
     "When those people gathered (to kill Khubaib)
     he borrowed a razor from me to shave his pubes
     and I gave it to him. Then he took a son of mine
     while I was unaware when he came upon him. I
     saw him placing my son on his thigh and the razor
     was in his hand. I got scared so much that
     Khubaib noticed the agitation on my face and
     said, 'Are you afraid that I will kill him? No, I will
     never do so.' By Allah, I never saw a prisoner
     better than Khubaib. By Allah, one day I saw
     him eating of a bunch of grapes in his hand while
     he was chained in irons, and there was no fruit at
     that time in Mecca." The daughter of Al-Harith
     used to say, "It was a boon Allah bestowed upon
     Khubaib." When they took him out of the
     Sanctuary (of Mecca) to kill him outside its
     boundaries, Khubaib requested them to let him
     offer two Rakat (prayer). They allowed him and
     he offered Two Rakat and then said, "Hadn't I
     been afraid that you would think that I was afraid
     (of being killed), I would have prolonged the
     prayer. O Allah, kill them all with no exception."
     (He then recited the poetic verse):-- "I being
     martyred as a Muslim, Do not mind how I am
     killed in Allah's Cause, For my killing is for
     Allah's Sake, And if Allah wishes, He will bless
     the amputated parts of a torn body" Then the son
     of Al Harith killed him. So, it was Khubaib who
     set the tradition for any Muslim sentenced to
     death in captivity, to offer a two-Rak'at prayer
     (before being killed). Allah fulfilled the invocation
     of Asim bin Thabit on that very day on which he
     was martyred. The Prophet informed his
     companions of their news and what had
     happened to them. Later on when some infidels
     from Quraish were informed that Asim had been
     killed, they sent some people to fetch a part of
     his body (i.e. his head) by which he would be
     recognized. (That was because) 'Asim had killed
     one of their chiefs on the day (of the battle) of
     Badr. So, a swarm of wasps, resembling a shady
     cloud, were sent to hover over Asim and protect
     him from their messenger and thus they could not
     cut off anything from his flesh. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 282: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "Free the captives, feed the
     hungry and pay a visit to the sick." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 283: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     I asked Ali, "Do you have the knowledge of any
     Divine Inspiration besides what is in Allah's
     Book?" 'Ali replied, "No, by Him Who splits the
     grain of corn and creates the soul. I don't think
     we have such knowledge, but we have the ability
     of understanding which Allah may endow a
     person with, so that he may understand the
     Qur'an, and we have what is written in this paper
     as well." I asked, "What is written in this paper?"
     He replied, "(The regulations of) blood-money,
     the freeing of captives, and the judgment that no
     Muslim should be killed for killing an infidel." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 284: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Some Ansari men asked permission from Allah's
     Apostle saying, "O Allah's Apostle! Allow us not
     to take the ransom of our nephew Al Abbas. The
     Prophet replied, "Do not leave a single Dirham
     thereof." 

     (In another narration) Anas said, "Some wealth
     was brought to the Prophet from Bahrain. Al
     Abbas came to him and said, 'O Allah's Apostle!
     Give me (some of it), as I have paid my and
     'Aqil's ransom.' The Prophet said, 'Take,' and
     gave him in his garment." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 285: 

     Narrated Jubair: 

     (who was among the captives of the Battle of
     Badr) I heard the Prophet reciting 'Surat-at-Tur'
     in the Maghrib prayer. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 286: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     "An infidel spy came to the Prophet while he was
     on a journey. The spy sat with the companions of
     the Prophet and started talking and then went
     away. The Prophet said (to his companions),
     'Chase and kill him.' So, I killed him." The
     Prophet then gave him the belongings of the
     killed spy (in addition to his share of the war
     booty). 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 287: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun: 

     Umar (after he was stabbed), instructed (his
     would-be-successor) saying, "I urge him (i.e. the
     new Caliph) to take care of those non-Muslims
     who are under the protection of Allah and His
     Apostle in that he should observe the convention
     agreed upon with them, and fight on their behalf
     (to secure their safety) and he should not
     over-tax them beyond their capability." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 288: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     Ibn 'Abbas said, "Thursday! What (great thing)
     took place on Thursday!" Then he started
     weeping till his tears wetted the gravels of the
     ground . Then he said, "On Thursday the illness
     of Allah's Apostle was aggravated and he said,
     "Fetch me writing materials so that I may have
     something written to you after which you will
     never go astray." The people (present there)
     differed in this matter and people should not
     differ before a prophet. They said, "Allah's
     Apostle is seriously sick.' The Prophet said, "Let
     me alone, as the state in which I am now, is
     better than what you are calling me for." The
     Prophet on his death-bed, gave three orders
     saying, "Expel the pagans from the Arabian
     Peninsula, respect and give gifts to the foreign
     delegates as you have seen me dealing with
     them." I forgot the third (order)" (Ya'qub bin
     Muhammad said, "I asked Al-Mughira bin
     'Abdur-Rahman about the Arabian Peninsula and
     he said, 'It comprises Mecca, Medina,
     Al-Yama-ma and Yemen." Ya'qub added, "And
     Al-Arj, the beginning of Tihama.") 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 289: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     'Umar saw a silken cloak being sold in the
     market and he brought it to Allah's Apostle and
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! Buy this cloak and
     adorn yourself with it on the 'Id festivals and on
     meeting the delegations." Allah's Apostle replied,
     "This is the dress for the one who will have no
     share in the Hereafter (or, this is worn by one
     who will have no share in the Hereafter)." After
     sometime had passed, Allah's Apostle sent a
     silken cloak to 'Umar. 'Umar took it and brought
     it to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! You have said that this is the dress of
     that who will have no share in the Hereafter (or,
     this is worn by one who will have no share in the
     Hereafter), yet you have sent me this!" The
     Prophet said," I have sent it) so that you may sell
     it or fulfill with it some of your needs." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 290d: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Umar and a group of the companions of the
     Prophet set out with the Prophet to Ibn Saiyad.
     He found him playing with some boys near the
     hillocks of Bani Maghala. Ibn Saiyad at that time
     was nearing his puberty. He did not notice (the
     Prophet's presence) till the Prophet stroked him
     on the back with his hand and said, "Ibn Saiyad!
     Do you testify that I am Allah's Apostle?" Ibn
     Saiyad looked at him and said, "I testify that you
     are the Apostle of the illiterates." 

     Then Ibn Saiyad asked the Prophet. "Do you
     testify that I am the apostle of Allah?" The
     Prophet said to him, "I believe in Allah and His
     Apostles." Then the Prophet said (to Ibn
     Saiyad). "What do you see?" Ibn Saiyad replied,
     "True people and false ones visit me." The
     Prophet said, "Your mind is confused as to this
     matter." The Prophet added, " I have kept
     something (in my mind) for you." Ibn Saiyad said,
     "It is Ad-Dukh." The Prophet said (to him),
     "Shame be on you! You cannot cross your
     limits." On that 'Umar said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     Allow me to chop his head off." The Prophet
     said, "If he should be him (i.e. Ad-Dajjal) then
     you cannot overpower him, and should he not be
     him, then you are not going to benefit by
     murdering him." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 290: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     (Later on) Allah's Apostle (once again) went
     along with Ubai bin Ka'b to the garden of
     date-palms where Ibn Saiyad was staying. When
     the Prophet entered the garden, he started hiding
     himself behind the trunks of the date-palms as he
     wanted to hear something from the Ibn Saiyad
     before the latter could see him. Ibn Saiyad was
     lying in his bed, covered with a velvet sheet from
     where his murmurs were heard. Ibn Saiyad's
     mother saw the Prophet while he was hiding
     himself behind the trunks of the date-palms. She
     addressed Ibn Saiyad, "O Saf!" (And this was
     his name). Ibn Saiyad got up. The Prophet said,
     "Had this woman let him to himself, he would
     have revealed the reality of his case." Then the
     Prophet got up amongst the people, glorifying
     Allah as He deserves, he mentioned Ad-Dajjal,
     saying, "I warn you about him (i.e. Ad-Dajjal)
     and there is no prophet who did not warn his
     nation about him, and Noah warned his nation
     about him, but I tell you a statement which no
     prophet informed his nation of. You should
     understand that he is a one-eyed man and Allah
     is not one-eyed." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 291: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     I asked the Prophet during his Hajj, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Where will you stay tomorrow?" He
     said, "Has Aqil left for us any house?" He then
     added, "Tomorrow we will stay at Khaif Bani
     Kinana, i.e. Al-Muhassab, where (the Pagans of)
     Quraish took an oath of Kufr (i.e. to be loyal to
     heathenism) in that Bani Kinana got allied with
     Quraish against Bani Hashim on the terms that
     they would not deal with the members of the is
     tribe or give them shelter." (Az-Zuhri said, "Khaif
     means valley.") (See Hadith No. 659, Vol. 2) 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 292: 

     Narrated Aslam: 

     Umar bin Al-Khattab appointed a freed slave of
     his, called Hunai, manager of the Hima (i.e. a
     pasture devoted for grazing the animals of the
     Zakat or other specified animals). He said to him,
     "O Hunai! Don't oppress the Muslims and ward
     off their curse (invocations against you) for the
     invocation of the oppressed is responded to (by
     Allah); and allow the shepherd having a few
     camels and those having a few sheep (to graze
     their animals), and take care not to allow the
     livestock of 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and the
     livestock of ('Uthman) bin 'Affan, for if their
     livestock should perish, then they have their
     farms and gardens, while those who own a few
     camels and those who own a few sheep, if their
     livestock should perish, would bring their
     dependents to me and appeal for help saying, 'O
     chief of the believers! O chief of the believers!'
     Would I then neglect them? (No, of course). So,
     I find it easier to let them have water and grass
     rather than to give them gold and silver (from the
     Muslims' treasury). By Allah, these people think
     that I have been unjust to them. This is their land,
     and during the pre-lslamic period, they fought for
     it and they embraced Islam (willingly) while it
     was in their possession. By Him in Whose Hand
     my life is! Were it not for the animals (in my
     custody) which I give to be ridden for striving in
     Allah's Cause, I would not have turned even a
     span of their land into a Hima." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 293: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     The Prophet said (to us), " List the names of
     those people who have announced that they are
     Muslims." So, we listed one thousand and five
     hundred men. Then we wondered, "Should we
     be afraid (of infidels) although we are one
     thousand and five hundred in number?" No
     doubt, we witnessed ourselves being afflicted
     with such bad trials that one would have to offer
     the prayer alone in fear. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 294: 

     Narrated Al-Amash: 

     "We (listed the Muslims and) found them five
     hundred." And Abu Muawiya said, "Between
     six-hundred to seven-hundred." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 295: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     A man came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I have enlisted in the army for
     such-and-such Ghazwa, and my wife is leaving
     for Hajj." Allah's Apostle said, "Go back and
     perform Hajj with your wife." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 296: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: 

     as follows in Hadith 297. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 297: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     We were in the company of Allah's Apostle in a
     Ghazwa, and he remarked about a man who
     claimed to be a Muslim, saying, "This (man) is
     from the people of the (Hell) Fire." When the
     battle started, the man fought violently till he got
     wounded. Somebody said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     The man whom you described as being from the
     people of the (Hell) Fire fought violently today
     and died." The Prophet said, "He will go to the
     (Hell) Fire." Some people were on the point of
     doubting (the truth of what the Prophet had said)
     while they were in this state, suddenly someone
     said that he was still alive but severely wounded.
     When night fell, he lost patience and committed
     suicide. The Prophet was informed of that, and
     he said, "Allah is Greater! I testify that I am
     Allah's Slave and His Apostle." Then he ordered
     Bilal to announce amongst the people: 'None will
     enter Paradise but a Muslim, and Allah may
     support this religion (i.e. Islam) even with a
     disobedient man.' 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 298: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle delivered a sermon and said,
     "Zaid received the flag and was martyred, then
     Ja'far took it and was martyred, then 'Abdullah
     bin Rawaha took it and was martyred, and then
     Khalid bin Al-Walid took it without being
     appointed, and Allah gave him victory." The
     Prophet added, "I am not pleased (or they will
     not be pleased) that they should remain (alive)
     with us," while his eyes were shedding tears. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 299: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The people of the tribes of Ril, Dhakwan, 'Usiya
     and Bani Lihyan came to the Prophet and
     claimed that they had embraced Islam, and they
     requested him to support them with some men to
     fight their own people. The Prophet supported
     them with seventy men from the Ansar whom we
     used to call Al-Qurra'(i.e. Scholars) who (out of
     piety) used to cut wood during the day and pray
     all the night. So, those people took the (seventy)
     men till they reached a place called Bi'r-Ma'ana
     where they betrayed and martyred them. So, the
     Prophet invoked evil on the tribe of Ril,
     Dhakwan and Bani Lihyan for one month in the
     prayer. 

     Narrated Qatada: Anas told us that they (i.e.
     Muslims) used to recite a Quranic Verse
     concerning those martyrs which was:-- "O Allah!
     Let our people be informed on our behalf that we
     have met our Lord Who has got pleased with us
     and made us pleased." Then the Verse was
     cancelled. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 300: 

     Narrated Abu Talha: 

     Whenever the Prophet conquered some people,
     he would stay in their town for three days. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 301: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet performed 'Umra, setting out from
     Al-Jarana where he distributed the war booty of
     Hunain. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 302: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Once a slave of Ibn 'Umar fled and joined the
     Byzantine. Khalid bin Al-Walid got him back and
     returned him to 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar). Once a
     horse of Ibn 'Umar also ran away and followed
     the Byzantines, and he (i.e. Khalid) got it back
     and returned it to 'Abdullah. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 303: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     That he was riding a horse on the day, the
     Muslims fought (against the Byzantines), and the
     commander of the Muslim army was Khalid bin
     Al-Walid who had been appointed by Abu Bakr.
     The enemy took the horse away, and when the
     enemy was defeated, Khalid returned the horse
     to him. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 304: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! We have slaughtered
     a young sheep of ours and have ground one Sa
     of barley. So, I invite you along with some
     persons." So, the Prophet said in a loud voice,
     "O the people of the Trench! Jabir had prepared
     "Sur" so come along." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 305: 

     Narrated Um Khalid: 

     (the daughter of Khalid bin Said) I went to
     Allah's Apostle with my father and I was Nearing
     a yellow shirt. Allah's Apostle said, "Sanah,
     Sanah!" ('Abdullah, the narrator, said that 'Sanah'
     meant 'good' in the Ethiopian language). I then
     started playing with the seal of Prophethood (in
     between the Prophet's shoulders) and my father
     rebuked me harshly for that. Allah's Apostle said.
     "Leave her," and then Allah's Apostle (invoked
     Allah to grant me a long life) by saying (thrice),
     "Wear this dress till it is worn out and then wear
     it till it is worn out, and then wear it till it is worn
     out." (The narrator adds, "It is said that she lived
     for a long period, wearing that (yellow) dress till
     its color became dark because of long wear.") 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 306: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Al-Hasan bin 'All took a date from the dates of
     the Sadaqa and put it in his mouth. The Prophet
     said (to him) in Persian, "Kakh, kakh! (i.e. Don't
     you know that we do not eat the Sadaqa (i.e.
     what is given in charity) (charity is the dirt of the
     people))." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 307: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet got up amongst us and mentioned
     Al Ghulul, emphasized its magnitude and
     declared that it was a great sin saying, "Don't
     commit Ghulul for I should not like to see anyone
     amongst you on the Day of Ressurection,
     carrying over his neck a sheep that will be
     bleating, or carrying over his neck a horse that
     will be neighing. Such a man will be saying: 'O
     Allah's Apostle! Intercede with Allah for me,'
     and I will reply, 'I can't help you, for I have
     conveyed Allah's Message to you Nor should I
     like to see a man carrying over his neck, a camel
     that will be grunting. Such a man will say, 'O
     Allah's Apostle! Intercede with Allah for me, and
     I will say, 'I can't help you for I have conveyed
     Allah's Message to you,' or one carrying over his
     neck gold and silver and saying, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! Intercede with Allah for me,' and I will
     say, 'I can't help you for I have conveyed Allah's
     Message to you,' or one carrying clothes that will
     be fluttering, and the man will say, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! Intercede with Allah for me.' And I will
     say, 'I can't help you, for I have conveyed Allah's
     Message to you." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 308: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     There was a man who looked after the family
     and the belongings of the Prophet and he was
     called Karkara. The man died and Allah's
     Apostle said, "He is in the '(Hell) Fire." The
     people then went to look at him and found in his
     place, a cloak he had stolen from the war booty. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 309: 

     Narrated Abaya bin Rifaa: 

     My grandfather, Rafi said, "We were in the
     company of the Prophet at DhulHulaifa, and the
     people suffered from hunger. We got some
     camels and sheep (as booty) and the Prophet
     was still behind the people. They hurried and put
     the cooking pots on the fire. (When he came) he
     ordered that the cooking pots should be upset
     and then he distributed the booty (amongst the
     people) regarding ten sheep as equal to one
     camel then a camel fled and the people chased it
     till they got tired, as they had a few horses (for
     chasing it). So a man threw an arrow at it and
     caused it to stop (with Allah's Permission). On
     that the Prophet said, 'Some of these animals
     behave like wild beasts, so, if any animal flee
     from you, deal with it in the same way." My
     grandfather asked (the Prophet ), "We hope (or
     are afraid) that we may meet the enemy
     tomorrow and we have no knives. Can we
     slaughter our animals with canes?" Allah's
     Apostle replied, "If the instrument used for killing
     causes the animal to bleed profusely and if
     Allah's Name is mentioned on killing it, then eat
     its meat (i.e. it is lawful) but won't use a tooth or
     a nail and I am telling you the reason: A tooth is a
     bone (and slaughtering with a bone is forbidden
     ), and a nail is the slaughtering instrument of the
     Ethiopians." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 310: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     Jarir bin 'Abdullah said to me, "Allah's Apostle
     said to me, 'Won't you relieve me from
     Dhul-Khalasa?' Dhul-Khalasa was a house
     where the tribe of Khatham used to stay, and it
     used to be called Ka'bat-ul Yamaniya. So I
     proceeded with one hundred-and-fifty (men)
     from the tribe of Ahmas who were good cavalry.
     I informed the Prophet that I could not sit firm on
     horses, so he stroke me on the chest with his
     hand and I noticed his finger marks on my chest.
     He invoked, 'O Allah! Make him firm and a
     guiding and rightly-guided man." Jarir set out
     towards that place, dismantled and burnt it, and
     then sent the good news to Allah's Apostle . The
     messenger of Jarir said to Allah's Apostle. "O
     Allah's Apostle! By Him Who has sent you with
     the Truth, I did not come to you till it (i.e. the
     house) had been turned (black) like a scabby
     camel (covered with tar)." So the Prophet
     invokes Allah to Bless the horses of the men of
     Ahmas five times. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 311: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, on the day of the Conquest of
     Mecca, "There is no migration (after the
     Conquest), but Jihad and good intentions, and
     when you are called for Jihad, you should
     immediately respond to the call." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 312: 

     Narrated Abu Uthman An-Nahdi: 

     Mujashi (bin Mas'ud) took his brother Mujalid
     bin Musud to the Prophet and said, "This is
     Mujalid and he will give a pledge of allegiance to
     you for migration." The Prophet said, "There is
     no migration after the Conquest of Mecca, but I
     will take his pledge of allegiance for Islam." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 313: 

     Narrated 'Ata': 

     I and 'Ubai bin 'Umar went to 'Aisha while she
     was staying near Thabir (i.e. a mountain). She
     said, "There is no Migration after Allah gave His
     Prophet victory over Mecca." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 314: 

     Narrated Sad bin 'Ubaida: 

     Abu Abdur-Rahman who was one of the
     supporters of Uthman said to Abu Talha who
     was one of the supporters of Ali, "I perfectly
     know what encouraged your leader (i.e. 'Ali) to
     shed blood. I heard him saying: Once the
     Prophet sent me and Az-Zubair saying, 'Proceed
     to such-and-such Ar-Roudah (place) where you
     will find a lady whom Hatib has given a letter. So
     when we arrived at Ar-Roudah, we requested
     the lady to hand over the letter to us. She said,
     'Hatib has not given me any letter.' We said to
     her. 'Take out the letter or else we will strip off
     your clothes.' So she took it out of her braid. So
     the Prophet sent for Hatib, (who came) and said,
     'Don't hurry in judging me, for, by Allah, I have
     not become a disbeliever, and my love to Islam is
     increasing. (The reason for writing this letter was)
     that there is none of your companions but has
     relatives in Mecca who look after their families
     and property, while I have nobody there, so I
     wanted to do them some favor (so that they
     might look after my family and property).' The
     Prophet believed him. 'Umar said, 'Allow me to
     chop off his (i.e. Hatib's) neck as he has done
     hypocrisy.' The Prophet said, (to 'Umar), 'Who
     knows, perhaps Allah has looked at the warriors
     of Badr and said (to them), 'Do whatever you
     like, for I have forgiven you.' " 'Abdur-Rahman
     added, "So this is what encouraged him (i.e.
     Ali)." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 315: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika: 

     Ibn Az-Zubair said to Ibn Ja'far "Do you
     remember when I, you and Ibn 'Abbas went out
     to receive Allah's Apostle?" Ibn Ja'far replied in
     the affirmative. Ibn Az-Zubair added, "And
     Allah's Apostle made us (i.e. I and Ibn 'Abbas)
     ride along with him and left you." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 316: 

     Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid: 

     I along with some boys went out to receive
     Allah's Apostle at Thaniyatal-Wada'. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 317: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     When the Prophet returned (from Jihad), he
     would say Takbir thrice and add, "We are
     returning, if Allah wishes, with repentance and
     worshipping and praising (our Lord) and
     prostrating ourselves before our Lord. Allah
     fulfilled His Promise and helped His Slave, and
     He Alone defeated the (infidel) clans." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 318: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     We were in the company of the Prophet while
     returning from 'Usfan, and Allah's Apostle was
     riding his she-camel keeping Safiya bint Huyay
     riding behind him. His she-camel slipped and
     both of them fell down. Abu Talha jumped from
     his camel and said, "O Allah's Apostle! May
     Allah sacrifice me for you." The Prophet said,
     "Take care of the lady." So, Abu Talha covered
     his face with a garment and went to Safiya and
     covered her with it, and then he set right the
     condition of their shecamel so that both of them
     rode, and we were encircling Allah's Apostle like
     a cover. When we approached Medina, the
     Prophet said, "We are returning with repentance
     and worshipping and praising our Lord." He kept
     on saying this till he entered Medina. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 319: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     That he and Abu Talha came in the company of
     the Prophet and Safiya was accompanying the
     Prophet, who let her ride behind him on his
     she-camel. During the journey, the she-camel
     slipped and both the Prophet and (his) wife fell
     down. Abu Talha (the sub-narrator thinks that
     Anas said that Abu Talha jumped from his camel
     quickly) said, "O Allah's Apostle! May Allah
     sacrifice me for your sake! Did you get hurt?"
     The Prophet replied,"No, but take care of the
     lady." Abu Talha covered his face with his
     garment and proceeded towards her and
     covered her with his garment, and she got up. He
     then set right the condition of their she-camel and
     both of them (i.e. the Prophet and his wife) rode
     and proceeded till they approached Medina. The
     Prophet said, "We are returning with repentance
     and worshipping and praising our Lord." The
     Prophet kept on saying this statement till he
     entered Medina. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 320: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     I was on a journey in the company of the
     Prophet and when we reached Medina, he said
     to me, "Enter the Mosque and offer two Rakat." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 321: 

     Narrated Ka'b: 

     Whenever the Prophet returned from a journey in
     the forenoon, he would enter the Mosque and
     offer two Rakat before sitting. 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 322: 

     Narrated Muharib bin Dithar: 

     Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, "When Allah's Apostle
     arrived at Medina, he slaughtered a camel or a
     cow." Jabir added, "The Prophet bought a camel
     from me for two Uqiyas (of gold) and one or two
     Dirhams. When he reached Sirar, he ordered
     that a cow be slaughtered and they ate its meat.
     When he arrived at Medina, he ordered me to go
     to the Mosque and offer two Rakat, and
     weighed (and gave) me the price of the camel." 


Volume 4, Book 52, Number 323: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Once I returned from a journey and the Prophet
     said (to me) "Offer two Rakat." (Sirar is a place
     near Medina). 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 53: 

    One-fifth of Booty to the
  Cause of Allah (Khumus) 



Volume 4, Book 53, Number 324: 

     Narrated Ali: 

     I got a she-camel in my share of the war booty
     on the day (of the battle) of Badr, and the
     Prophet had given me a she-camel from the
     Khumus. When I intended to marry Fatima, the
     daughter of Allah's Apostle, I had an
     appointment with a goldsmith from the tribe of
     Bani Qainuqa' to go with me to bring Idhkhir (i.e.
     grass of pleasant smell) and sell it to the
     goldsmiths and spend its price on my wedding
     party. I was collecting for my she-camels
     equipment of saddles, sacks and ropes while my
     two she-camels were kneeling down beside the
     room of an Ansari man. I returned after collecting
     whatever I collected, to see the humps of my two
     she-camels cut off and their flanks cut open and
     some portion of their livers was taken out. When
     I saw that state of my two she-camels, I could
     not help weeping. I asked, "Who has done this?"
     The people replied, "Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib
     who is staying with some Ansari drunks in this
     house." I went away till I reached the Prophet
     and Zaid bin Haritha was with him. The Prophet
     noticed on my face the effect of what I had
     suffered, so the Prophet asked. "What is wrong
     with you." I replied, "O Allah's Apostle! I have
     never seen such a day as today. Hamza attacked
     my two she-camels, cut off their humps, and
     ripped open their flanks, and he is sitting there in
     a house in the company of some drunks." The
     Prophet then asked for his covering sheet, put it
     on, and set out walking followed by me and Zaid
     bin Haritha till he came to the house where
     Hamza was. He asked permission to enter, and
     they allowed him, and they were drunk. Allah's
     Apostle started rebuking Hamza for what he had
     done, but Hamza was drunk and his eyes were
     red. Hamza looked at Allah's Apostle and then
     he raised his eyes, looking at his knees, then he
     raised up his eyes looking at his umbilicus, and
     again he raised up his eyes look in at his face.
     Hamza then said, "Aren't you but the slaves of
     my father?" Allah's Apostle realized that he was
     drunk, so Allah's Apostle retreated, and we went
     out with him. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 325: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (mother of the believers) After the death of Allah
     's Apostle Fatima the daughter of Allah's Apostle
     asked Abu Bakr As-Siddiq to give her, her share
     of inheritance from what Allah's Apostle had left
     of the Fai (i.e. booty gained without fighting)
     which Allah had given him. Abu Bakr said to her,
     "Allah's Apostle said, 'Our property will not be
     inherited, whatever we (i.e. prophets) leave is
     Sadaqa (to be used for charity)." Fatima, the
     daughter of Allah's Apostle got angry and
     stopped speaking to Abu Bakr, and continued
     assuming that attitude till she died. Fatima
     remained alive for six months after the death of
     Allah's Apostle. 

     She used to ask Abu Bakr for her share from the
     property of Allah's Apostle which he left at
     Khaibar, and Fadak, and his property at Medina
     (devoted for charity). Abu Bakr refused to give
     her that property and said, "I will not leave
     anything Allah's Apostle used to do, because I
     am afraid that if I left something from the
     Prophet's tradition, then I would go astray."
     (Later on) Umar gave the Prophet's property (of
     Sadaqa) at Medina to 'Ali and 'Abbas, but he
     withheld the properties of Khaibar and Fadak in
     his custody and said, "These two properties are
     the Sadaqa which Allah's Apostle used to use for
     his expenditures and urgent needs. Now their
     management is to be entrusted to the ruler."
     (Az-Zuhrl said, "They have been managed in this
     way till today.") 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 326: 

     Narrated Malik bin Aus: 

     While I was at home, the sun rose high and it got
     hot. Suddenly the messenger of 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab came to me and said, "The chief of
     the believers has sent for you." So, I went along
     with him till I entered the place where 'Umar was
     sitting on a bedstead made of date-palm leaves
     and covered with no mattress, and he was
     leaning over a leather pillow. I greeted him and
     sat down. He said, "O Malik! Some persons of
     your people who have families came to me and I
     have ordered that a gift should be given to them,
     so take it and distribute it among them." I said,
     "O chief of the believers! I wish that you order
     someone else to do it." He said, "O man! Take
     it." While I was sitting there with him, his
     doorman Yarfa' came saying, "'Uthman,
     'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf, Az-Zubair and Sad bin
     Abi Waqqas are asking your permission (to see
     you); may I admit them?" 'Umar said, "Yes", So
     they were admitted and they came in, greeted
     him, and sat down. After a while Yarfa' came
     again and said, "May I admit 'Ali and 'Abbas?"
     'Umar said, "yes." So, they were admitted and
     they came in and greeted (him) and sat down.
     Then 'Abbas said, "O chief of the believers!
     Judge between me and this (i.e. 'Ali)." They had
     a dispute regarding the property of Bani
     An-Nadir which Allah had given to His Apostle
     as Fai. The group (i.e. 'Uthman and his
     companions) said, "O chief of the believers!
     Judge between them and relieve both of them
     front each other." 'Umar said, "Be patient! I
     beseech you by Allah by Whose Permission the
     Heaven and the Earth exist, do you know that
     Allah's Apostle said, 'Our (i.e. prophets')
     property will not be inherited, and whatever we
     leave, is Sadaqa (to be used for charity),' and
     Allah's Apostle meant himself (by saying "we'')?"
     The group said, "He said so." 'Umar then turned
     to 'Ali and 'Abbas and said, "I beseech you by
     Allah, do you know that Allah's Apostle said
     so?" They replied, " He said so." 'Umar then
     said, "So, I will talk to you about this matter.
     Allah bestowed on His Apostle with a special
     favor of something of this Fai (booty) which he
     gave to nobody else." 'Umar then recited the
     Holy Verses: "What Allah bestowed as (Fai)
     Booty on his Apostle (Muhammad) from them
     --- for this you made no expedition with either
     cavalry or camelry: But Allah gives power to His
     Apostles over whomever He will 'And Allah is
     able to do all things." 9:6) 

     'Umar added "So this property was especially
     given to Allah's Apostle, but, by Allah, neither
     did he take possession of it and leave your, nor
     did he favor himself with it to your exclusion, but
     he gave it to all of you and distributed it amongst
     you till this property remained out of it. Allah's
     Apostle used to spend the yearly expenses of his
     family out of this property and used to keep the
     rest of its revenue to be spent on Allah 's Cause.
     Allah 's Apostle kept on doing this during all his
     lifetime. I ask you by Allah do you know this?"
     They replies in the affirmative. 'Umar then said to
     'Ali and 'Abbas. "I ask you by Allah, do you
     know this?" 'Umar added, "When Allah had
     taken His Prophet unto Him, 'Abu Bakr said, 'I
     am the successor of Allah's Apostle so, Abu
     Bakr took over that property and managed it in
     the same way as Allah's Apostle used to do, and
     Allah knows that he was true, pious and
     rightly-guided, and he was a follower of what
     was right. Then Allah took Abu Bakr unto Him
     and I became Abu Bakr's successor, and I kept
     that property in my possession for the first two
     years of my Caliphate, managing it in the same
     way as Allah's Apostle used to do and as Abu
     Bakr used to do, and Allah knows that I have
     been true, pious, rightly guided, and a follower of
     what is right. Now you both (i.e. 'Ah and
     'Abbas) came to talk to me, bearing the same
     claim and presenting the same case; you, 'Abbas,
     came to me asking for your share from your
     nephew's property, and this man, i.e. 'Ali, came
     to me asking for his wife's share from her father's
     property. I told you both that Allah's Apostle
     said, 'Our (prophets') properties are not to be
     inherited, but what we leave is Sadaqa (to be
     used for charity).' When I thought it right that I
     should hand over this property to you, I said to
     you, 'I am ready to hand over this property to
     you if you wish, on the condition that you would
     take Allah's Pledge and Convention that you
     would manage it in the same way as Allah's
     Apostle used to, and as Abu Bakr used to do,
     and as I have done since I was in charge of it.'
     So, both of you said (to me), 'Hand it over to us,'
     and on that condition I handed it over to you. So,
     I ask you by Allah, did I hand it over to them on
     this condition?" The group aid, "Yes." Then
     'Umar faced 'Ali and Abbas saying, "I ask you
     by Allah, did I hand it over to you on this
     condition?" They said, "Yes. " He said, " Do you
     want now to give a different decision? By Allah,
     by Whose Leave both the Heaven and the Earth
     exist, I will never give any decision other than
     that (I have already given). And if you are unable
     to manage it, then return it to me, and I will do
     the job on your behalf." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 327: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The delegates of the tribe of 'Abdul-Qais came
     and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are from the
     tribe of Rabi'a, and there is the infidels of the
     tribe of Mudar intervening between you and us,
     so we cannot come to you except in the Sacred
     Months. So please order us some instructions
     that we may apply it to ourselves and also invite
     our people whom we left behind us to observe as
     well." The Prophet said, "I order you (to do) four
     (things) and forbid you (to do) four: I order you
     to believe in Allah, that is, to testify that None
     has the right to be worshipped but Allah (the
     Prophet pointed with his hand); to offer prayers
     perfectly; to pay Zakat; to fast the month of
     Ramadan, and to pay the Khumus (i.e. one-fifth)
     of the war booty to Allah and I forbid you to use
     Ad-dubba', An-Naqir, Al-Hantam and
     Al-Muzaffat (i.e. utensils used for preparing
     alcoholic drinks)." (See Hadith No. 50, Vol. 1). 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 328: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "My heirs should not take
     even a single Dinar (i.e. anything from my
     property), and whatever I leave, excluding the
     expenditure of my wives and my laborers, will be
     Sadaqa (i.e. be used for charity)."' 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 329: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle died, and there was nothing in my
     house that a living being could eat, except some
     barley Lying on a shelf. So, I ate of it for a long
     period and measured it, and (after a short
     period) it was consumed. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 330: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Al-Harith: 

     The Prophet did not leave anything (after his
     death) except his arms, a white mule, and a
     (piece of) land which he had given as Sadaqa. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 331: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) When the sickness of
     Allah's Apostle got aggravated, he asked the
     permission of his wives that he should be treated
     in my house, and they permitted him. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 332: 

     Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika: 

     'Aisha said, "The Prophet died in my house on
     the day of my turn while he was leaning on my
     chest closer to my neck, and Allah made my
     saliva mix with his Saliva." 'Aisha added,
     "'AbdurRahman came with a Siwak and the
     Prophet was too weak to use it so I took it,
     chewed it and then (gave it to him and he)
     cleaned his teeth with it." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 333: 

     Narrated Safiya: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) That she came to visit
     Allah's Apostle while he was in Itikaf(i.e.
     seclusion in the Mosque during the last ten days
     of Ramadan. When she got up to return, Allah's
     Apostle got up with her and accompanied her,
     and when he reached near the gate of the
     Mosque close to the door (of the house) of Um
     Salama, the wife of the Prophet, two Ansari men
     passed by them and greeted Allah's Apostle and
     then went away. Allah's Apostle addressed them
     saying, "Don't hurry! (She is my wife)," They
     said, "Glorified be Allah! O Allah's Apostle (You
     are far away from any suspicion)," and his saying
     was hard on them. Allah's Apostle said, "Satan
     circulates in the mind of a person as blood does
     (in his body). I was afraid that Satan might put
     some (evil) thoughts in your minds." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 334: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Once I went upstairs in Hafsa's house and saw
     the Prophet answering the call of nature with his
     back towards the Qibla and facing Sham. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 335: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     That Allah's Apostle used to offer the 'Asr prayer
     while the sun was still shining in her Hujra (i.e.
     her dwelling place). 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 336: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet stood up and delivered a sermon,
     and pointing to 'Aisha's house (i.e. eastwards),
     he said thrice, "Affliction (will appear from)
     here," and, "from where the side of the Satan's
     head comes out (i.e. from the East)." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 337: 

     Narrated 'Amra bint Abdur-Rahman: 

     'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet told her that once
     Allah's Apostle was with her and she heard
     somebody asking permission to enter Hafsa's
     house. She said, "O Allah's Apostle! This man is
     asking permission to enter your house." Allah's
     Apostle replied, "I think he is so-and-so
     (meaning the foster uncle of Hafsa). What is
     rendered illegal because of blood relations, is
     also rendered illegal because of the
     corresponding foster-relations." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 338: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     That when Abu Bakr became the Caliph, he sent
     him to Bahrain and wrote this letter for him, and
     stamped it with the Ring of the Prophet. Three
     lines were engraved on the Ring, (the word)
     'Muhammad' was in a line, 'Apostle' was in
     another line, and 'Allah' in a third. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 339: 

     Narrated 'Isa bin Tahman: 

     Anas brought out to us two worn out leather
     shoes without hair and with pieces of leather
     straps. Later on Thabit Al-Banani told me that
     Anas said that they were the shoes of the
     Prophet. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 340: 

     Narrated Abu Burda: 

     'Aisha brought out to us a patched wool Len
     garment, and she said, "(It chanced that) the soul
     of Allah's Apostle was taken away while he was
     wearing this." Abu-Burda added, "Aisha brought
     out to us a thick waist sheet like the ones made
     by the Yemenites, and also a garment of the type
     called Al-Mulabbada." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 341: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     When the cup of Allah's Apostle got broken, he
     fixed it with a silver wire at the crack. (The
     sub-narrator, 'Asim said, "I saw the cup and
     drank (water) in it.") 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 342: 

     Narrated 'Ali bin Al-Husain: 

     That when they reached Medina after returning
     from Yazid bin Mu'awaiya after the martyrdom
     of Husain bin 'Ali (may Allah bestow His Mercy
     upon him), Al-Miswar bin Makhrama met him
     and said to him, "Do you have any need you may
     order me to satisfy?" 'Ali said, "No." Al-Miswar
     said, Will you give me the sword of Allah's
     Apostle for I am afraid that people may take it
     from you by force? By Allah, if you give it to me,
     they will never be able to take it till I die." When
     Ali bin Abu Talib demanded the hand of the
     daughter of Abi Jahal to be his wife besides
     Fatima, I heard Allah's Apostle on his pulpit
     delivering a sermon in this connection before the
     people, and I had then attained my age of
     puberty. Allah's Apostle said, "Fatima is from
     me, and I am afraid she will be subjected to trials
     in her religion (because of jealousy)." The
     Prophet then mentioned one of his son-in-law
     who was from the tribe of 'Abu Shams, and he
     praised him as a good son-in-law, saying,
     "Whatever he said was the truth, and he
     promised me and fulfilled his promise. I do not
     make a legal thing illegal, nor do I make an illegal
     thing legal, but by Allah, the daughter of Allah's
     Apostle and the daughter of the enemy of Allah,
     (i.e. Abu Jahl) can never get together (as the
     wives of one man) (See Hadith No. 76, Vo. 5). 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 343: 

     Narrated Ibn Al-Hanafiya: 

     If Ali had spoken anything bad about 'Uthman
     then he would have mentioned the day when
     some persons came to him and complained
     about the Zakat officials of 'Uthman. 'Ali then
     said to me, "Go to 'Uthman and say to him, 'This
     document contains the regulations of spending
     the Sadaqa of Allah's Apostle so order your
     Zakat officials to act accordingly." I took the
     document to 'Uthman. 'Uthman said, "Take it
     away, for we are not in need of it." I returned to
     'Ali with it and informed him of that. He said,
     "Put it whence you took it." 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Suqa: I heard Mundhir
     At-Tuzi reporting Ibn Hanafiya who said, "My
     father sent me saying, 'Take this letter to 'Uthman
     for it contains the orders of the Prophet
     concerning the Sadaqa.' " 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 344: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     Fatima complained of what she suffered from the
     hand mill and from grinding, when she got the
     news that some slave girls of the booty had been
     brought to Allah's Apostle. She went to him to
     ask for a maid-servant, but she could not find
     him, and told 'Aisha of her need. When the
     Prophet came, Aisha informed him of that. The
     Prophet came to our house when we had gone to
     our beds. (On seeing the Prophet) we were
     going to get up, but he said, 'Keep at your
     places,' I felt the coolness of the Prophet's feet
     on my chest. Then he said, "Shall I tell you a
     thing which is better than what you asked me
     for? When you go to your beds, say: 'Allahu
     Akbar (i.e. Allah is Greater)' for 34 times, and
     'Alhamdu Lillah (i.e. all the praises are for Allah)'
     for 33 times, and Subhan Allah (i.e. Glorified be
     Allah) for 33 times. This is better for you than
     what you have requested." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 345: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari: 

     A man amongst us begot a boy whom he named
     Al-Qasim. On that the Ansar said, (to the man),
     "We will never call you Abu-al-Qasim and will
     never please you with this blessed title." So, he
     went to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I have begotten a boy whom I named
     Al-Qasim and the Ansar said, 'We will never call
     you Abu-al-Qasim, nor will we please you with
     this title.' " The Prophet said, "The Ansar have
     done well. Name by my name, but do not name
     by my Kunya, for I am Qasim." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 346: 

     Narrated Muawiya: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If Allah wants to do good
     for somebody, he makes him comprehend the
     Religion (i.e. Islam), and Allah is the Giver and I
     am Al-Qasim (i.e. the distributor), and this
     (Muslim) nation will remain victorious over their
     opponents, till Allah's Order comes and they will
     still be victorious " 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said,
     "Neither do I give you (anything) nor withhold
     (anything) from you, but I am just a distributor
     (i.e. Qasim), and I give as I am ordered." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 347: 

     Narrated Khaula Al-Ansariya: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Some people
     spend Allah's Wealth (i.e. Muslim's wealth) in an
     unjust manner; such people will be put in the
     (Hell) Fire on the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 348: 

     Narrated 'Urwa-al-Bariqi: 

     The Prophet said, "Horses are always the source
     of good, namely, rewards (in the Hereafter) and
     booty, till the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 349: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When Khosrau is ruined,
     there will be no Khosrau after him; and when
     Caesar is ruined, there will be no Caesar after
     him. By Him in Whose Hands my life is, you will
     spend their treasures in Allah's Cause." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 350: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Samura: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When Khosrau is ruined,
     there will be no Khosrau after him; and when
     Caesar is ruined, their will be no Caesar after
     him. By Him in Whose Hands my life is, you will
     spend their treasures in Allah's Cause." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 351: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Booty has been made legal
     for me." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 352: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Allah guarantees him who
     strives in His Cause and whose motivation for
     going out is nothing but Jihad in His Cause and
     belief in His Word, that He will admit him into
     Paradise (if martyred) or bring him back to his
     dwelling place, whence he has come out, with
     what he gains of reward and booty." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 353: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A prophet amongst the
     prophets carried out a holy military expedition,
     so he said to his followers, 'Anyone who has
     married a woman and wants to consummate the
     marriage, and has not done so yet, should not
     accompany me; nor should a man who has built a
     house but has not completed its roof; nor a man
     who has sheep or shecamels and is waiting for
     the birth of their young ones.' So, the prophet
     carried out the expedition and when he reached
     that town at the time or nearly at the time of the
     'Asr prayer, he said to the sun, 'O sun! You are
     under Allah's Order and I am under Allah's
     Order O Allah! Stop it (i.e. the sun) from setting.'
     It was stopped till Allah made him victorious. 

     Then he collected the booty and the fire came to
     burn it, but it did not burn it. He said (to his
     men), 'Some of you have stolen something from
     the booty. So one man from every tribe should
     give me a pledge of allegiance by shaking hands
     with me.' (They did so and) the hand of a man
     got stuck over the hand of their prophet. Then
     that prophet said (to the man), 'The theft has
     been committed by your people. So all the
     persons of your tribe should give me the pledge
     of allegiance by shaking hands with me.' The
     hands of two or three men got stuck over the
     hand of their prophet and he said, "You have
     committed the theft.' Then they brought a head of
     gold like the head of a cow and put it there, and
     the fire came and consumed the booty. The
     Prophet added: Then Allah saw our weakness
     and disability, so he made booty legal for us." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 354: 

     Narrated Aslam: 

     'Umar said, "Were it not for those Muslims who
     have not come to existence yet, I would have
     distributed (the land of) every town I conquer
     among the fighters as the Prophet distributed the
     land of Khaibar." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 355: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari: 

     A bedouin asked the Prophet, "A man may fight
     for the sake of booty, and another may fight so
     that he may be mentioned by the people, and a
     third may fight to show his position (i.e. bravery);
     which of these regarded as fighting in Allah's
     Cause?" The Prophet said, "He who fights so
     that Allah's Word (i.e. Islam) should be superior,
     fights for Allah's Cause." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 356: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Mulaika: 

     Some silken cloaks with golden buttons were
     presented to the Prophet. He distributed them
     amongst his companions and kept one for
     Makhrama, bin Naufal. Later on Makhrama
     came along with his son Al-Miswar bin
     Makhrama, and stood up at the gate and said (to
     his son). "Call him (i.e. the Prophet) to me." The
     Prophet heard his voice, took a silken cloak and
     brought it to him, placing those golden buttons in
     front of him saying, "O Abu-al-Miswar! I have
     kept this aside for you! O Abu-al Miswar! I have
     kept this aside for you!" Makhrama was a
     bad-tempered man. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 357: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     People used to give some of their datepalms to
     the Prophet (as a gift), till he conquered Bani
     Quraiza and Bani An-Nadir, whereupon he
     started returning their favors. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 358: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair: 

     When Az-Zubair got up during the battle of
     Al-Jamal, he called me and I stood up beside
     him, and he said to me, "O my son! Today one
     will be killed either as an oppressor or as an
     oppressed one. I see that I will be killed as an
     oppressed one. My biggest worry is my debts.
     Do you think, if we pay the debts, there will be
     something left for us from our money?"
     Az-Zubair added, "O my son! Sell our property
     and pay my debts." Az-Zubair then willed
     one-third of his property and willed one-third of
     that portion to his sons; namely, 'Abdullah's sons.
     He said, "One-third of the one third. If any
     property is left after the payment of the debts,
     one-third (of the one-third of what is left) is to be
     given to your sons." (Hisham, a sub-narrator
     added, "Some of the sons of 'Abdullah were
     equal in age to the sons of Az-Zubair e.g.
     Khubaib and 'Abbas. 'Abdullah had nine sons
     and nine daughters at that time." (The narrator
     'Abdullah added:) My father (Az-Zubair) went
     on drawing my attention to his debts saying, "If
     you should fail to pay part of the debts, appeal to
     my Master to help you." By Allah! I could not
     understand what he meant till I asked, "O father!
     Who is your Master?" He replied, "Allah (is my
     Master)." By Allah, whenever I had any difficulty
     regarding his debts, I would say, "Master of
     Az-Zubair! Pay his debts on his behalf ." and
     Allah would (help me to) pay it. Az-Zubair was
     martyred leaving no Dinar or Dirham but two
     pieces of land, one of which was (called)
     Al-Ghaba, and eleven houses in Medina, two in
     Basra, one in Kufa and one in Egypt. In fact, the
     source of the debt which he owed was, that if
     somebody brought some money to deposit with
     him. Az Zubair would say, "No, (i won't keep it
     as a trust), but I take it as a debt, for I am afraid
     it might be lost." Az-Zubair was never appointed
     governor or collector of the tax of Kharaj or any
     other similar thing, but he collected his wealth
     (from the war booty he gained) during the holy
     battles he took part in, in the company of the
     Prophet, Abu Bakr, 'Umar, and 'Uthman.
     ('Abdullah bin Az-Zubair added:) When I
     counted his debt, it turned to be two million and
     two hundred thousand. (The sub-narrator
     added:) Hakim bin Hizam met Abdullah bin
     Zubair and asked, "O my nephew! How much is
     the debt of my brother?" 'Abdullah kept it as a
     secret and said, "One hundred thousand," Hakim
     said, "By Allah! I don't think your property will
     cover it." On that 'Abdullah said to him, "What if
     it is two million and two hundred thousand?"
     Hakim said, "I don't think you can pay it; so if
     you are unable to pay all of it, I will help you."
     Az-Zubair had already bought Al-Ghaba for one
     hundred and seventy thousand. 'Abdullah sold it
     for one million and six hundred thousand. Then
     he called the people saying, "Any person who
     has any money claim on Az-Zubair should come
     to us in Al-Ghaba." There came to him 'Abdullah
     bin Ja'far whom Az-Zubair owed four hundred
     thousand. He said to 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair, "If
     you wish I will forgive you the debt." 'Abdullah
     (bin Az-Zubair) said, "No." Then Ibn Ja'far said,
     "If you wish you can defer the payment if you
     should defer the payment of any debt." Ibn
     Az-Zubair said, "No." 'Abdullah bin Ja'far said,
     "Give me a piece of the land." 'Abdullah bin
     AzZubair said (to him), "Yours is the land
     extending from this place to this place." So,
     'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair sold some of the
     property (including the houses) and paid his debt
     perfectly, retaining four and a half shares from the
     land (i.e. Al-Ghaba). He then went to Mu'awlya
     while 'Amr bin 'Uthman, Al-Mundhir bin
     Az-Zubair and Ibn Zam'a were sitting with him.
     Mu'awiya asked, "At what price have you
     appraised Al-Ghaba?" He said, "One hundred
     thousand for each share," Muawiya asked, "How
     many shares have been left?" 'Abdullah replied,
     "Four and a half shares." Al-Mundhir bin
     Az-Zubair said, "I would like to buy one share
     for one hundred thousand." 'Amr bin 'Uthman
     said, "I would like to buy one share for one
     hundred thousand." Ibn Zam'a said, "I would like
     to buy one share for one hundred thousand."
     Muawiya said, "How much is left now?"
     'Abdullah replied, "One share and a half."
     Muawiya said, "I would like to buy it for one
     hundred and fifty thousand." 'Abdullah also sold
     his part to Muawiya six hundred thousand. When
     Ibn AzZubair had paid all the debts. Az-Zubair's
     sons said to him, "Distribute our inheritance
     among us." He said, "No, by Allah, I will not
     distribute it among you till I announce in four
     successive Hajj seasons, 'Would those who have
     money claims on Az-Zubair come so that we
     may pay them their debt." So, he started to
     announce that in public in every Hajj season, and
     when four years had elapsed, he distributed the
     inheritance among the inheritors. Az-Zubair had
     four wives, and after the one-third of his property
     was excluded (according to the will), each of his
     wives received one million and two hundred
     thousand. So the total amount of his property
     was fifty million and two hundred thousand. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 359: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     'Uthman did not join the Badr battle because he
     was married to one of the daughters of Allah's
     Apostle and she was ill. So, the Prophet said to
     him. "You will get a reward and a share (from the
     war booty) similar to the reward and the share of
     one who has taken part in the Badr battle." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 360: 

     Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakim and Miswar bin
     Makhrama: 

     When the Hawazin delegation came to Allah's
     Apostle after they had embraced Islam and
     requested him to return their properties and war
     prisoners to them, Allah's Apostle said, "To me
     the best talk is the truest, so you may choose
     either of two things; the war prisoners or the
     wealth, for I have delayed their distribution."
     Allah's Apostle had waited for them for over ten
     days when he returned from Ta'if. So, when
     those people came to know that Allah's Apostle
     was not going to return to them except one of the
     two things the said, "We choose our war
     Prisoners 'Allah's Apostle stood up amongst the
     Muslims, and after glorifying Allah as He
     deserved, he said, "Now then, these brothers of
     yours have come to us with repentance, and I
     see it logical that I should return their captives to
     them, so whoever of you likes to do that as a
     favor then he can do it, and whoever amongst
     you likes to stick to his share, let him give up his
     prisoners and we will compensate him from the
     very first Fai' (i.e. war booty received without
     fight) which Allah will give us." On that, all the
     people said. 'O Allah's Apostles We have agreed
     willingly to do so (return the captives)" Then
     Allah's Apostle said to them "I do not know who
     amongst you has agreed to this and who has not.
     You should return and let your leaders inform me
     of your agreement." The people returned and
     their leaders spoke to them, and then came to
     Allah's Apostle and said, "All the people have
     agreed willingly to do so and have given the
     permission to return the war prisoners (without
     Compensation)" (Az-Zuhri, the sub-narrator
     states) This is what has been related to us about
     the captives of Hawazin. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 361: 

     Narrated Zahdam: 

     Once we were in the house of Abu Musa who
     presented a meal containing cooked chicken. A
     man from the tribe of Bani Taim Allah with red
     complexion as if he were from the Byzantine war
     prisoners, was present. Abu Musa invited him to
     share the meal but he (apologised) saying. "I saw
     chickens eating dirty things and so I have had a
     strong aversion to eating them, and have taken an
     oath that I will not eat chickens." Abu Musa said,
     "Come along, I will tell you about this matter (i.e.
     how to cancel one's oat ). I went to the Prophet
     in the company of a group of Al-Ashariyin,
     asked him to provide us with means of
     conveyance. He said, 'By Allah, I will not
     provide you with any means of conveyance and I
     have nothing to make you ride on.' Then some
     camels as booty were brought to Allah's Apostle
     and he asked for us saying. 'Where are the group
     of Al-Ash'ariyun?' Then he ordered that we
     should be given five camels with white humps.
     When we set out we said, 'What have we done?
     We will never be blessed (with what we have
     been given).' So, we returned to the Prophet and
     said, 'We asked you to provide us with means of
     conveyance, but you took an oath that you
     would not provide us with any means of
     conveyance. Did you forget (your oath when you
     gave us the camels)? He replied. 'I have not
     provided you with means of conveyance, but
     Allah has provided you with it, and by Allah,
     Allah willing, if ever I take an oath to do
     something, and later on I find that it is more
     beneficial to do something different, I will do the
     thing which is better, and give expiation for my
     oath." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 362: 

     Narrated Nafi from Ibn Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle sent a Sariya towards Najd, and
     Abdullah bin 'Umar was in the Sariya. They
     gained a great number of camels as war booty.
     The share of each one of them was twelve or
     eleven camels, and they were given an extra
     camel each. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 363: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle used to give extra share to some
     of the members of the Sariya he used to send, in
     addition to the shares they shared with the army
     in general. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 364: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     We got the news of the migration of the Prophet
     while we were in Yemen, so we set out migrating
     to him. We were, I and my two brothers, I being
     the youngest, and one of my brothers was Abu
     Burda and the other was Abu Ruhm. We were
     over fifty (or fifty-three or fifty two) men from
     our people. We got on board a ship which took
     us to An-Najashi in Ethiopia, and there we found
     Ja'far bin Abu Talib and his companions with
     An-Najaishi. Ja'far said (to us), "Allah's Apostle
     has sent us here and ordered us to stay here, so
     you too, stay with us." We stayed with him till we
     all left (Ethiopia) and met the Prophet at the time
     when he had conquered Khaibar. He gave us a
     share from its booty (or gave us from its booty).
     He gave only to those who had taken part in the
     Ghazwa with him. but he did not give any share
     to any person who had not participated in
     Khaibar's conquest except the people of our
     ship, besides Ja'far and his companions, whom
     he gave a share as he did them (i.e. the people of
     the ship). 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 365: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Allah's Apostle said (to me), "If the property of
     Bahrain had come to us, I would have given you
     so much and so much." But the Bahrain property
     did not come till the Prophet had died. When the
     Bahrain property came. Abu Bakr ordered
     somebody to announce, "Any person who has
     money claim on Allah's Apostle or whom Allah's
     Apostle had promised something, should come
     to us." So, I went to him and said, "Allah's
     Apostle had promised to give me so much an so
     much." Abu Bakr scooped up money with both
     hands thrice for me." (The sub-narrator Sufyan
     illustrated this action by scooping up with both
     hands and said, "Ibn Munkadir, another
     sub-narrator, used to illustrate it in this way.") 

     Narrated Jabir: Once I went to Abu Bakr and
     asked for the money but he did not give me, and
     I went to him again, but he did not give me, so I
     went to him for the third time and said, "I asked
     you, but you did not give me; then I asked you
     (for the second time) and you did not give me;
     then I asked you (for the third time) but you did
     not give me. You should either give me or allow
     yourself to be considered a miser regarding my
     case." Abu Bakr said, "You tell me that I am a
     miser with regard to you. But really, whenever I
     rejected your request, I had the inclination to give
     you." 

     (In another narration Jabir added:) So, Abu Bakr
     scooped up money with both hands for me and
     asked me to count it. I found out that It was five
     hundred. Abu Bakr told me to take twice that
     amount. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 366: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     While Allah's Apostle was distributing the booty
     at Al-Ja'rana, somebody said to him "Be just (in
     your distribution)." The Prophet replied, "Verily I
     would be miserable if I did not act justly." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 367: 

     Narrated Jubair bin Mutim: 

     The Prophet talked about war prisoners of Badr
     saying, "Had Al-Mutim bin Adi been alive and
     interceded with me for these mean people, I
     would have freed them for his sake." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 368: 

     Narrated Jubair bin Mutim: 

     I and 'Uthman bin 'Affan went to Allah's Apostle
     and said, "O Allah's Apostle! You have given to
     Bani Al-Muttalib and left us although they and
     we are of the same kinship to you." Allah's
     Apostle said, "Bani Muttalib and Bani Hashim
     are one and the same." The Prophet did not give
     a share to Bani Abd Shams and Bani Naufai.
     (Ibn Ishaq said, "Abd Shams and Hashim and
     Al-Muttalib were maternal brothers and their
     mother was 'Atika bint Murra and Naufal was
     their paternal brother.) 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 369: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf: 

     While I was standing in the row on the day (of
     the battle) of Badr, I looked to my right and my
     left and saw two young Ansari boys, and I
     wished I had been stronger than they. One of
     them called my attention saying, "O Uncle! Do
     you know Abu Jahl?" I said, "Yes, What do you
     want from him, O my nephew?" He said, "I have
     been informed that he abuses Allah's Apostle. By
     Him in Whose Hands my life is, if I should see
     him, then my body will not leave his body till
     either of us meet his fate." I was astonished at
     that talk. Then the other boy called my attention
     saying the same as the other had said. After a
     while I saw Abu Jahl walking amongst the
     people. I said (to the boys), "Look! This is the
     man you asked me about." So, both of them
     attacked him with their swords and struck him to
     death and returned to Allah'S Apostle to inform
     him of that. Allah's Apostle asked, "Which of you
     has killed him?" Each of them said, "I Have killed
     him." Allah's Apostle asked, "Have you cleaned
     your swords?" They said, "No. " He then looked
     at their swords and said, "No doubt, you both
     have killed him and the spoils of the deceased
     will be given to Muadh bin Amr bin Al-Jamuh."
     The two boys were Muadh bin 'Afra and Muadh
     bin Amr bin Al-Jamuh. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 370: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     We set out in the company of Allah's Apostle on
     the day (of the battle) of Hunain. When we faced
     the enemy, the Muslims retreated and I saw a
     pagan throwing himself over a Muslim. I turned
     around and came upon him from behind and hit
     him on the shoulder with the sword He (i.e. the
     pagan) came towards me and seized me so
     violently that I felt as if it were death itself, but
     death overtook him and he released me. I
     followed 'Umar bin Al Khattab and asked (him),
     "What is wrong with the people (fleeing)?" He
     replied, "This is the Will of Allah," After the
     people returned, the Prophet sat and said,
     "Anyone who has killed an enemy and has a
     proof of that, will posses his spoils." I got up and
     said, "Who will be a witness for me?" and then
     sat down. The Prophet again said, "Anyone who
     has killed an enemy and has proof of that, will
     possess his spoils." I (again) got up and said,
     "Who will be a witness for me?" and sat down.
     Then the Prophet said the same for the third time.
     I again got up, and Allah's Apostle said, "O Abu
     Qatada! What is your story?" Then I narrated the
     whole story to him. A man (got up and) said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! He is speaking the truth, and the
     spoils of the killed man are with me. So please
     compensate him on my behalf." On that Abu
     Bakr As-Siddiq said, "No, by Allah, he (i.e.
     Allah's Apostle ) will not agree to give you the
     spoils gained by one of Allah's Lions who fights
     on the behalf of Allah and His Apostle." The
     Prophet said, "Abu Bakr has spoken the truth."
     So, Allah's Apostle gave the spoils to me. I sold
     that armor (i.e. the spoils) and with its price I
     bought a garden at Bani Salima, and this was my
     first property which I gained after my conversion
     to Islam. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 371: 

     Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 

     Hakim bin Hizam said, "I asked Allah's Apostle
     for something, and he gave me. I asked him
     again, and he gave me, and said to me. 'O
     Hakim! This wealth is like green sweet (i.e. fruit),
     and if one takes it without greed, then one is
     blessed in it, and if one takes it with greediness,
     then one is not blessed in it, and will be like the
     one who eats without satisfaction. And an upper
     (i.e. giving) hand is better than a lower (i.e.
     taking) hand,' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! By Him
     Who has sent you with the Truth. I will not ask
     anyone for anything after you till I leave this
     world." So, when Abu Bakr during his Caliphate,
     called Hakim to give him (some money), Hakim
     refused to accept anything from him. Once 'Umar
     called him (during his Caliphate) in order to give
     him something, but Hakim refused to accept it,
     whereupon 'Umar said, "O Muslims! I give him
     (i.e. Haklm) his right which Allah has assigned to
     him) from this Fai '(booty), but he refuses to take
     it." So Haklm never took anything from anybody
     after the Prophet till he died. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 372: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
     vowed to observe Itikaf for one day during the
     Pre-lslamic period." The Prophet ordered him to
     fulfill his vow. 'Umar gained two lady captives
     from the war prisoners of Hunain and he left
     them in some of the houses at Mecca. When
     Allah's Apostle freed the captives of Hunain
     without ransom, they came out walking in the
     streets. 'Umar said (to his son), "O Abdullah!
     See what is the matter." 'Abdullah replied,
     "Allah's Apostle has freed the captives without
     ransom." He said (to him), "Go and set free those
     two slave girls." (Nafi added:) Allah's Apostle
     did not perform the 'Umra from Al-Jarana, and if
     he had performed the 'Umra, it would not have
     been hidden from 'Abdullah. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 373: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Taghlib: 

     Allah's Apostle gave (gifts) to some people to the
     exclusion of some others. The latter seemed to
     be displeased by that. The Prophet said, "I give
     to some people, lest they should deviate from
     True Faith or lose patience, while I refer other
     people to the goodness and contentment which
     Allah has put in their hearts, and 'Amr bin Taghlib
     is amongst them." 'Amr bin Taghlib said, "The
     statement of Allah's Apostle is dearer to me than
     red camels." 

     Narrated Al-Hasan: 'Amr bin Taghlib told us that
     Allah's Apostle got some property or some war
     prisoners and he distributed them in the above
     way (i.e. giving to some people to the exclusion
     of others) . 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 374: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "I give to Quraish people in
     order to let them adhere to Islam, for they are
     near to their life of Ignorance (i.e. they have
     newly embraced Islam and it is still not strong in
     their hearts." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 375: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     When Allah favored His Apostle with the
     properties of Hawazin tribe as Fai (booty), he
     started giving to some Quarries men even up to
     one-hundred camels each, whereupon some
     Ansari men said about Allah's Apostle, "May
     Allah forgive His Apostle! He is giving to (men
     of) Quraish and leaves us, in spite of the fact that
     our swords are still dropping blood (of the
     infidels)" When Allah's Apostle was informed of
     what they had said, he called the Ansar and
     gathered them in a leather tent and did not call
     anybody else along, with them. When they
     gathered, Allah's Apostle came to them and said,
     "What is the statement which, I have been
     informed, and that which you have said?" The
     learned ones among them replied," O Allah's
     Apostle! The wise ones amongst us did not say
     anything, but the youngsters amongst us said,
     'May Allah forgive His Apostle; he gives the
     Quarish and leaves the Ansar, in spite of the fact
     that our swords are still dribbling (wet) with the
     blood of the infidels.' " Allah's Apostle replied, I
     give to such people as are still close to the period
     of Infidelity (i.e. they have recently embraced
     Islam and Faith is still weak in their hearts).
     Won't you be pleased to see people go with
     fortune, while you return with Allah's Apostle to
     your houses? By Allah, what you will return with,
     is better than what they are returning with." The
     Ansar replied, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle, we are
     satisfied' Then the Prophet said to them." You
     will find after me, others being preferred to you.
     Then be patient till you meet Allah and meet His
     Apostle at Al-Kauthar (i.e. a fount in Paradise)."
     (Anas added:) But we did not remain patient. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 376: 

     Narrated Jubair bin Mutim: 

     That while he was with Allah's Apostle who was
     accompanied by the people on their way back
     from Hunain, the bedouins started begging things
     of Allah's Apostle so much so that they forced
     him to go under a Samura tree where his loose
     outer garment was snatched away. On that,
     Allah's Apostle stood up and said to them,
     "Return my garment to me. If I had as many
     camels as these trees, I would have distributed
     them amongst you; and you will not find me a
     miser or a liar or a coward." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 377: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     While I was walking with the Prophet who was
     wearing a Najrani outer garment with a thick
     hem, a bedouin came upon the Prophet and
     pulled his garment so violently that I could
     recognize the impress of the hem of the garment
     on his shoulder, caused by the violence of his
     pull. Then the bedouin said, "Order for me
     something from Allah's Fortune which you have."
     The Prophet turned to him and smiled, and
     ordered that a gift be given to him. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 378: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     On the day (of the battle) of Hunain, Allah's
     Apostle favored some people in the distribution
     of the booty (to the exclusion of others); he gave
     Al-Aqra' bin Habis one-hundred camels and he
     gave 'Uyaina the same amount, and also gave to
     some of the eminent Arabs, giving them
     preference in this regard. Then a person came
     and said, "By Allah, in this distribution justice has
     not been observed, nor has Allah's Pleasure been
     aimed at." I said (to him), "By Allah, I will inform
     the Prophet (of what you have said), "I went and
     informed him, and he said, "If Allah and His
     Apostle did not act justly, who else would act
     justly. May Allah be merciful to Moses, for he
     was harmed with more than this, yet he kept
     patient." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 379: 

     Narrated Asma bint Abu Bakr: 

     I used to carry the date stones on my head from
     the land of Az-Zubair which Allah's Apostle had
     given to him, and it was at a distance of 2/3 of a
     Farsakh from my house. 

     Narrated Hisham's father: The Prophet (gave
     Az-Zubair a piece of land from the property of
     Bani An-Nadir (gained as war booty). 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 380: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Umar bin Al-Khattab expelled all the Jews and
     Christians from the land of Hijaz. Allah's Apostle
     after conquering Khaibar, thought of expelling the
     Jews from the land which, after he conquered it
     belonged to Allah, Allah's Apostle and the
     Muslims. But the Jews requested Allah's Apostle
     to leave them there on the condition that they
     would do the labor and get half of the fruits (the
     land would yield). Allah's Apostle said, "We shall
     keep you on these terms as long as we wish."
     Thus they stayed till the time of 'Umar's Caliphate
     when he expelled them to Taima and Ariha. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 381: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal: 

     While we were besieging the fort of Khaibar, a
     person threw a leather container containing fat,
     and I ran to take it, but when I turned I saw the
     Prophet (standing behind), so I felt embarrassed
     in front of him. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 382: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     In our holy battles, we used to get honey and
     grapes, as war booty which we would eat and
     would not store. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 383: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa: 

     We were afflicted with hunger during the besiege
     of Khaibar, and when it was the day of (the
     battle of) Khaibar, we slaughtered the donkeys
     and when the pots got boiling (with their meat).
     Allah's Apostle made an announcement that all
     the pots should be upset and that nobody should
     eat anything of the meat of the donkeys. We
     thought that the Prophet prohibited that because
     the Khumus had not been taken out of the booty
     (i.e. donkeys); other people said, "He prohibited
     eating them for ever." The sub-narrator added, "I
     asked Said bin Jubair who said, 'He has made
     the eating of donkeys' meat illegal for ever.") 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 384: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Dinar: 

     I was sitting with Jabir bin Zaid and 'Amr bin
     Aus, and Bjalla was narrating to them in 70 A.H.
     the year when Musab bin Az-Zubair was the
     leader of the pilgrims of Basra. We were sitting
     at the steps of Zam-zam well and Bajala said, "I
     was the clerk of Juz bin Muawiya, Al-Ahnaf's
     paternal uncle. A letter came from 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab one year before his death; and it was
     read:-- "Cancel every marriage contracted
     among the Magians between relatives of close
     kinship (marriages that are regarded illegal in
     Islam: a relative of this sort being called
     Dhu-Mahram.)" 'Umar did not take the Jizya
     from the Magian infidels till 'Abdur-Rahman bin
     'Auf testified that Allah's Apostle had taken the
     Jizya from the Magians of Hajar. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 385: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin 'Auf Al-Ansari: 

     (who was an ally of Bam 'Amr bin Lu'ai and one
     of those who had taken part in (the Ghazwa of)
     Badr): Allah's Apostle sent Abu 'Ubaida bin
     Al-Jarreh to Bahrain to collect the Jizya. Allah's
     Apostle had established peace with the people of
     Bahrain and appointed Al-'Ala' bin Al-Hadrami
     as their governor. When Abu 'Ubaida came from
     Bahrain with the money, the Ansar heard of Abu
     'Ubaida's arrival which coincided with the time of
     the morning prayer with the Prophet. When
     Allah's Apostle led them in the morning prayer
     and finished, the Ansar approached him, and he
     looked at them and smiled on seeing them and
     said, "I feel that you have heard that Abu.
     'Ubaida has brought something?" They said,
     "Yes, O Allah's Apostle' He said, "Rejoice and
     hope for what will please you! By Allah, I am not
     afraid of your poverty but I am afraid that you
     will lead a life of luxury as past nations did,
     whereupon you will compete with each other for
     it, as they competed for it, and it will destroy you
     as it destroyed them." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 386: 

     Narrated Jubair bin Haiya: 

     'Umar sent the Muslims to the great countries to
     fight the pagans. When Al-Hurmuzan embraced
     Islam, 'Umar said to him. "I would like to consult
     you regarding these countries which I intend to
     invade." Al-Hurmuzan said, "Yes, the example of
     these countries and their inhabitants who are the
     enemies. of the Muslims, is like a bird with a
     head, two wings and two legs; If one of its wings
     got broken, it would get up over its two legs,
     with one wing and the head; and if the other wing
     got broken, it would get up with two legs and a
     head, but if its head got destroyed, then the two
     legs, two wings and the head would become
     useless. The head stands for Khosrau, and one
     wing stands for Caesar and the other wing stands
     for Faris. So, order the Muslims to go towards
     Khosrau." So, 'Umar sent us (to Khosrau)
     appointing An-Numan bin Muqrin as our
     commander. When we reached the land of the
     enemy, the representative of Khosrau came out
     with forty-thousand warriors, and an interpreter
     got up saying, "Let one of you talk to me!"
     Al-Mughira replied, "Ask whatever you wish."
     The other asked, "Who are you?" Al-Mughira
     replied, "We are some people from the Arabs;
     we led a hard, miserable, disastrous life: we used
     to suck the hides and the date stones from
     hunger; we used to wear clothes made up of fur
     of camels and hair of goats, and to worship trees
     and stones. While we were in this state, the Lord
     of the Heavens and the Earths, Elevated is His
     Remembrance and Majestic is His Highness, sent
     to us from among ourselves a Prophet whose
     father and mother are known to us. Our Prophet,
     the Messenger of our Lord, has ordered us to
     fight you till you worship Allah Alone or give
     Jizya (i.e. tribute); and our Prophet has informed
     us that our Lord says:-- "Whoever amongst us is
     killed (i.e. martyred), shall go to Paradise to lead
     such a luxurious life as he has never seen, and
     whoever amongst us remain alive, shall become
     your master." (Al-Mughira, then blamed
     An-Numan for delaying the attack and) An-Nu'
     man said to Al-Mughira, "If you had participated
     in a similar battle, in the company of Allah's
     Apostle he would not have blamed you for
     waiting, nor would he have disgraced you. But I
     accompanied Allah's Apostle in many battles and
     it was his custom that if he did not fight early by
     daytime, he would wait till the wind had started
     blowing and the time for the prayer was due (i.e.
     after midday)." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 387: 

     Narrated Abu Humaid As-Saidi: 

     We accompanied the Prophet in the Ghazwa of
     Tabuk and the king of 'Aila presented a white
     mule and a cloak as a gift to the Prophet. And
     the Prophet wrote to him a peace treaty allowing
     him to keep authority over his country. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 388: 

     Narrated Juwairiya bin Qudama At-Tamimi: 

     We said to 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, Jo Chief of
     the believers! Advise us." He said, "I advise you
     to fulfill Allah's Convention (made with the
     Dhimmis) as it is the convention of your Prophet
     and the source of the livelihood of your
     dependents (i.e. the taxes from the Dhimmis.) " 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 389: 

     Narrated Yahya bin Said: 

     Once the Prophet called the Ansar in order to
     grant them part of the land of Bahrain. On that
     they said, "No! By Allah, we will not accept it
     unless you grant a similar thing to our Quarries
     brothers as well." He said, "That will be their's if
     Allah wishes." But when the Ansar persisted in
     their request, he said, "After me you will see
     others given preference over you in this respect
     (in which case) you should be patient till you
     meet me at the Tank (of Al-Kauthar)." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 390: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle once said to me, "If the revenue
     of Bahrain came, I would give you this much and
     this much." When Allah's Apostle had died, the
     revenue of Bahrain came, and Abu Bakr
     announced, " Let whoever was promised
     something by Allah's Apostle come to me." So, I
     went to Abu Bakr and said, "Allah's Apostle said
     to me, 'If the revenue of Bahrain came, I would
     give you this much and this. much." On that Abu
     Bakr said to me, "Scoop (money) with both your
     hands." I scooped money with both my hands
     and Abu Bakr asked me to count it. I counted it
     and it was five-hundred (gold pieces). The total
     amount he gave me was one thousand and five
     hundred (gold pieces.) 

     Narrated Anas: Money from Bahrain was
     brought to the Prophet . He said, "Spread it in
     the Mosque." It was the biggest amount that had
     ever been brought to Allah's Apostle . In the
     meantime Al-'Abbas came to him and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Give me, for I gave the ransom
     of myself and Aqil." The Prophet said (to him),
     "Take." He scooped money with both hands and
     poured it in his garment and tried to lift it, but he
     could not and appealed to the Prophet, "Will you
     order someone to help me in lifting it?" The
     Prophet said, "No." Then Al-'Abbas said, "Then
     will you yourself help me carry it?" The Prophet
     said, "No." Then Al 'Abbas threw away some of
     the money, but even then he was not able to lift
     it, and so he gain requested the Prophet "Will
     you order someone to help me carry it?" The
     Prophet said, "No." Then Al-'Abbas said, "Then
     will you yourself yelp me carry it?" The Prophet
     said, 'No." So, Al-'Abbas threw away some
     more money and lifted it on his shoulder and
     went away. The Prophet kept on looking at him
     with astonishment at his greediness till he went
     out of our sight. Allah's Apostle did not get up
     from there till not a single Dirham remained from
     that money. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 391: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever killed a person
     having a treaty with the Muslims, shall not smell
     the smell of Paradise though its smell is perceived
     from a distance of forty years." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 392: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     While we were in the Mosque, the Prophet came
     out and said, "Let us go to the Jews" We went
     out till we reached Bait-ul-Midras. He said to
     them, "If you embrace Islam, you will be safe.
     You should know that the earth belongs to Allah
     and His Apostle, and I want to expel you from
     this land. So, if anyone amongst you owns some
     property, he is permitted to sell it, otherwise you
     should know that the Earth belongs to Allah and
     His Apostle." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 393: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     that he heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, "Thursday! And
     you know not what Thursday is? After that Ibn
     'Abbas wept till the stones on the ground were
     soaked with his tears. On that I asked Ibn
     'Abbas, "What is (about) Thursday?" He said,
     "When the condition (i.e. health) of Allah's
     Apostle deteriorated, he said, 'Bring me a bone
     of scapula, so that I may write something for you
     after which you will never go astray.'The people
     differed in their opinions although it was improper
     to differ in front of a prophet, They said, 'What is
     wrong with him? Do you think he is delirious?
     Ask him (to understand). The Prophet replied,
     'Leave me as I am in a better state than what you
     are asking me to do.' Then the Prophet ordered
     them to do three things saying, 'Turn out all the
     pagans from the Arabian Peninsula, show respect
     to all foreign delegates by giving them gifts as I
     used to do.' " The sub-narrator added, "The third
     order was something beneficial which either Ibn
     'Abbas did not mention or he mentioned but I
     forgot.' 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 394: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     When Khaibar was conquered, a roasted
     poisoned sheep was presented to the Prophets
     as a gift (by the Jews). The Prophet ordered,
     "Let all the Jews who have been here, be
     assembled before me." The Jews were collected
     and the Prophet said (to them), "I am going to
     ask you a question. Will you tell the truth?'' They
     said, "Yes.' The Prophet asked, "Who is your
     father?" They replied, "So-and-so." He said,
     "You have told a ie; your father is so-and-so."
     They said, "You are right." He siad, "Will you
     now tell me the truth, if I ask you about
     something?" They replied, "Yes, O
     AbuAl-Qasim; and if we should tell a lie, you can
     realize our lie as you have done regarding our
     father." On that he asked, "Who are the people
     of the (Hell) Fire?" They said, "We shall remain
     in the (Hell) Fire for a short period, and after that
     you will replace us." The Prophet said, "You may
     be cursed and humiliated in it! By Allah, we shall
     never replace you in it.'' Then he asked, "Will
     you now tell me the truth if I ask you a question?"
     They said, "Yes, O Ab Li-AI-Qasim." He asked,
     "Have you poisoned this sheep?" They said,
     "Yes." He asked, "What made you do so?" They
     said, "We wanted to know if you were a liar in
     which case we would get rid of you, and if you
     are a prophet then the poison would not harm
     you." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 395: 

     Narrated 'Asim: 

     I asked Anas about the Qunut (i.e. invocation in
     the prayer). Anas said, "It should be recited
     before bowing." I said, "So-and-so claims that
     you say that it should be recited after bowing."
     He replied, "He is mistaken." Then Anas narrated
     to us that the Prophet invoked evil on the tribe of
     Bani-Sulaim for one month after bowing. ' Anas
     Further said, "The Prophet had sent 40 or 70
     Qaris (i.e. men well versed in the knowledge of
     the Qur'an) to some pagans, but the latter
     struggled with them and martyred them, although
     there was a peace pact between them and the
     Prophet I had never seen the Prophet so sorry
     and worried about anybody as he was about
     them (i.e. the Qaris)." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 396: 

     Narrated Um Hani: 

     the daughter of Abu Talib: I went to Allah's
     Apostle on the day of the conquest of Mecca
     and found him taking a bath, and his daughter
     Fatima was screening him. I greeted him and he
     asked, "Who is that?" I said, "I, Um Hani bint
     Abi Talib." He said, "Welcome, O Um Hani."
     When he had finished his bath, he stood up and
     offered eight Rakat while dressed in one
     garment. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! My brother
     'Ali has declared that he will kill a man to whom I
     have granted asylum. The man is so and-so bin
     Hubaira." Allah's Apostle said, "O Um Hani! We
     will grant asylum to the one whom you have
     granted asylum." (Um Hani said, "That (visit)
     took place in the Duha (i.e. forenoon)). 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 397: 

     Narrated Ibrahim At-Tamimi's father: 

     'Ali delivered a sermon saying, "We have no
     book to read except the Book of Allah and what
     is written in this paper which contains verdicts
     regarding (retaliation for) wounds, the ages of the
     camels (given as Zakat or as blood money) and
     the fact that Medina is a sanctuary in between
     Air mountain to so-and-so (mountain). So,
     whoever innovates in it an heresy or commits a
     sin or gives shelter in it, to such an innovator will
     incur the Curse of Allah, the angels and all the
     people, and none of his compulsory or optional
     good deeds of worship will be accepted. And
     whoever (freed slave) takes as his master (i.e.
     befriends) other than his real masters will incur
     the same (Curse). And the asylum granted by
     any Muslim is to be secured by all the other
     Muslims, and whoever betrays a Muslim in this
     respect will incur the same (Curse)." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 398: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Abi Hathma: 

     'Abdullah bin Sahl and Muhaiyisa bin Mas'ud bin
     Zaid set out to Khaibar, the inhabitants of which
     had a peace treaty with the Muslims at that time.
     They parted and later on Muhaiyisa came upon
     'Abdullah bin Sah! and found him murdered
     agitating in his blood. He buried him and returned
     to Medina. 'Abdur Rahman bin Sahl, Muhaiyisa
     and Huwaiuisa, the sons of Mas'ud came to the
     Prophet and 'Abdur Rahman intended to talk,
     but the Prophet said (to him), "Let the eldest of
     you speak." as 'Abdur-Rahman was the
     youngest:. 'Abdur-Rahman kept silent and the
     other two spoke. The Prophet said, "If you
     swear as to who has committed the murder, you
     will have the right to take your right from the
     murderer." They said, "How should we swear if
     we did not witness the murder or see the
     murderer?" The Prophet said, "Then the Jews
     can clear themselves from the charge by taking
     Alaska (an oath taken by men that it was not
     they who committed the murder)." The!y said,
     "How should we believe in the oaths of infidels?"
     So, the Prophet himself paid the blood money (of
     'Abdullah). (See Hadith No. 36 Vol. 9.) 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 399: 

     Narrated ' Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     That Abu Sufyan bin Harb Informed him that
     Heraclius called him and the members of a
     caravan from Quraish who had gone to Sham as
     traders, during the truce which Allah's Apostle
     had concluded with Abu Sufyan and the Quraish
     infidels. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 400: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Once the Prophet was bewitched so that he
     began to imagine that he had done a thing which
     in fact he had not done. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 401: 

     Narrated Auf bin Mali: 

     I went to the Prophet during the Ghazwa of
     Tabuk while he was sitting in a leather tent. He
     said, "Count six signs that indicate the approach
     of the Hour: my death, the conquest of
     Jerusalem, a plague that will afflict you (and kill
     you in great numbers) as the plague that afflicts
     sheep, the increase of wealth to such an extent
     that even if one is given one hundred Dinars, he
     will not be satisfied; then an affliction which no
     Arab house will escape, and then a truce
     between you and Bani Al-Asfar (i.e. the
     Byzantines) who will betray you and attack you
     under eighty flags. Under each flag will be twelve
     thousand soldiers. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 402: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Abu Bakr, on the day of Nahr (i.e. slaughtering
     of animals for sacrifice), sent me in the company
     of others to make this announcement: "After this
     year, no pagan will be allowed to perform the
     Hajj, and none will be allowed to perform the
     Tawaf of the Ka'ba undressed." And the day of
     Al-Hajj-ul-Akbar is the day of Nahr, and it
     called Al-Akbar because the people call the
     'Umra Al-Hajj-ul-Asghar (i.e. the minor Hajj).
     Abu Bakr threw back the pagans' covenant that
     year, and therefore, no pagan performed the Hajj
     in the year of Hajj-ul-Wada' of the Prophets. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 403: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever has (the
     following) four characteristics will be a pure
     hypocrite: "If he speaks, he tells a lie; if he gives a
     promise, he breaks it, if he makes a covenant he
     proves treacherous; and if he quarrels, he
     behaves in a very imprudent evil insulting manner
     (unjust). And whoever has one of these
     characteristics, has one characteristic of a
     hypocrite, unless he gives it us." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 404: 

     Narrated Ali: 

     We did not, write anything from the Prophet
     except the Quran and what is written in this
     paper, (wherein) the Prophet said, "Medina is a
     sanctuary from (the mountain of) Air to so
     and-so, therefore, whoever innovates (in it) an
     heresy or commits a sin, or gives shelter to such
     an innovator, will incur the Curse of Allah. the
     angels and all the people; and none of his
     compulsory or optional good deeds of worship
     will be accepted And the asylum granted by any
     Muslim Is to be secured by all the Muslims even
     if it is granted by one of the lowest social status
     among them. And whoever betrays a Muslim in
     this respect will incur the Curse of Allah, the
     angels and all the people, and his compulsory
     and optional good deeds of worship will not be
     accepted. And any freed slave will take as
     masters (befriends) people other than his own
     real masters who freed him without taking the
     permission of the latter, will incur the Curse of
     Allah, the angels and all the people, and his
     compulsory and optional good deeds of worship
     will not be accepted." 

     Narrated Said: Abu Huraira once said (to the
     people), "What will your state be when you can
     get no Dinar or Dirhan (i.e. taxes from the
     Dhimmis)?" on that someone asked him, "What
     makes you know that this state will take place, O
     Abu- Hu raira?" He said, "By Him in Whose
     Hands Abu Huraira's life is, I know it through the
     statement of the true and truly inspired one (i.e.
     the Prophet)." The people asked, "What does
     the Statement say?" He replied, "Allah and His
     Apostle's asylum granted to Dhimmis, i.e.
     non-Muslims living in a Muslim territory) will be
     outraged, and so Allah will make the hearts of
     these Dhimmis so daring that they will refuse to
     pay the Jizya they will be supposed to pay." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 405: 

     Narrated Al-Amash: 

     I asked Abu Wail, "Did you take part in the
     battle of Siffin?" He said, 'Yes, and I heard Sahl
     bin Hunaif (when he was blamed for lack of zeal
     for fighting) saying, "You'd better blame your
     wrong opinions. I wish you had seen me on the
     day of Abu Jandal. If I had the courage to
     disobey the Prophet's orders, I would have done
     so. We had kept out swords on our necks and
     shoulders, for a thing which frightened us. And
     we did so, we found it easier for us, except in the
     case of the above battle (of ours).' " 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 406: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     We were in Siffin and Sahl bin Hunaif got up and
     said, "O people! Blame yourselves! We were
     with the Prophet on the day of Hudaibiya, and if
     we had been called to fight, we would have
     fought. But 'Umar bin Al Khatab came and said,
     'O Allah's Apostle! Aren't we in the right and our
     opponents in the wrongs' Allah's Apostle said,
     'Yes.' 'Umar said, 'Aren't our killed persons in
     Paradise and their's in Hell?' He said, 'Yes.'
     'Umar said, 'Then why should we accept hard
     terms in matters concerning our religion? Shall
     we return before Allah judges between us and
     them?' Allah's Apostle said, 'O Ibn Al-Khattab! I
     am the Apostle of Allah and Allah will never
     degrade me. Then 'Umar went to Abu Bakr and
     told him the same as he had told the Prophet. 

     On that Abu Bakr said (to 'Umar). 'He is the
     Apostle of Allah and Allah will never degrade
     him.' Then Surat-al-Fath (i.e. Victory) was
     revealed and Allah's Apostle recited it to the end
     in front of 'Umar. On that 'Umar asked, 'O
     Allah's Apostle! Was it (i.e. the Hudaibiya
     Treaty) a victory?' Allah's Apostle said, "Yes" 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 407: 

     Narrated Asma 'bint Abi Bakr: 

     During the period of the peace treaty of Quraish
     with Allah's Apostle, my mother, accompanied
     by her father, came to visit me, and she was a
     pagan. I consulted Allah's Apostle, "O Allah's
     Apostle! My mother has come to me and she
     desires to receive a reward from me, shall I keep
     good relation with her?" He said, "Yes, keep
     good relation with her." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 408: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     When the Prophet intended to perform the 'Umra
     he sent a person to the people of Mecca asking
     their permission to enter Mecca. They stipulated
     that he would not stay for more than three days
     and would not enter it except with sheathed arms
     and would not preach (Islam) to any of them. So
     Ali bin Abi-Talib started writing the treaty
     between them. He wrote, "This is what
     Muhammad, Apostle of Allah has agreed to."
     The (Meccans) said, "If we knew that you
     (Muhammad) are the Apostle of Allah, then we
     would not have prevented you and would have
     followed you. But write, 'This is what
     Muhammad bin 'Abdullah has agreed to..' " On
     that Allah's Apostle said, "By Allah, I am
     Muhammad bin 'Abdullah, and, by Allah, I am
     Apostle of 'Allah." Allah's Apostle used not to
     write; so he asked 'Ali to erase the expression of
     Apostle of Allah. On that 'Ali said, "By Allah I
     will never erase it." Allah's Apostle said (to 'Ali),
     "Let me see the paper." When 'Ali showed him
     the paper, the Prophet erased the expression
     with his own hand. When Allah's Apostle had
     entered Mecca and three days had elapsed, the
     Meccans came to 'Ali and said, "Let your friend
     (i.e. the Prophet) quit Mecca." Ali informed
     Allah's Apostle about it and Allah's Apostle said,
     "Yes," and then he departed. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 409: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     While the Prophet was in the state of prostration,
     surrounded by a group of people from Quraish
     pagans. 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait came and brought
     the intestines of a camel and threw them on the
     back of the Prophet . The Prophet did not raise
     his head from prostration till Fatima (i.e. his
     daughter) came and removed those intestines
     from his back, and invoked evil on whoever had
     done (the evil deed). The Prophet said, "O Allah!
     Destroy the chiefs of Quraish, O Allah! Destroy
     Abu Jahl bin Hisham, 'Utba bin Rabi'a, Shaiba
     bin Rabi'a. 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait 'Umaiya bin
     Khalaf (or Ubai bin Kalaf)." Later on I saw all of
     them killed during the battle of Badr and their
     bodies were thrown into a well except the body
     of Umaiya or Ubai, because he was a fat person,
     and when he was pulled, the parts of his body
     got separated before he was thrown into the
     well. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 410: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, ''Every betrayer will have a
     flag on the Day of Resurrection" One of the two
     sub-narrators said that the flag would be fixed,
     and the other said that it would be shown on the
     Day of Resurrection, so that the betrayer might
     be recognized by it. 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 411: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "Every betrayer will have a
     flag which will be fixed on the Day of
     Resurrection, and the flag's prominence will be
     made in order to show the betrayal he
     committed." 


Volume 4, Book 53, Number 412: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle said on the day of the conquest
     of Mecca, "There is no migration now, but there
     is Jihad (i.e.. holy battle) and good intentions.
     And when you are called for Jihad, you should
     come out at once" Allah's Apostle also said, on
     the day of the conquest of Mecca, "Allah has
     made this town a sanctuary since the day He
     created the Heavens and the Earth. So, it is a
     sanctuary by Allah's Decree till the Day of
     Resurrection. Fighting in it was not legal for
     anyone before me, and it was made legal for me
     only for an hour by daytime. So, it (i.e. Mecca) is
     a sanctuary by Allah's Decree till the Day of
     Resurrection. Its thorny bushes should not be
     cut, and its game should not be chased, its fallen
     property (i.e. Luqata) should not be picked up
     except by one who will announce it publicly; and
     its grass should not be uprooted," On that
     Al-'Abbas said, "O Allah's Apostle! Except the
     Idhkhir, because it is used by the goldsmiths and
     by the people for their houses." On that the
     Prophet said, "Except the Idhkhir." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 54: 

     Beginning of Creation 



Volume 4, Book 54, Number 413: 

     Narrated 'Imran bin Husain: 

     Some people of Bani Tamim came to the
     Prophet and he said (to them), "O Bani Tamim!
     rejoice with glad tidings." They said, "You have
     given us glad tidings, now give us something." On
     hearing that the color of his face changed then the
     people of Yemen came to him and he said, "O
     people of Yemen ! Accept the good tidings, as
     Bani Tamim has refused them." The Yemenites
     said, "We accept them. Then the Prophet started
     taking about the beginning of creation and about
     Allah's Throne. In the mean time a man came
     saying, "O 'Imran! Your she-camel has run
     away!'' (I got up and went away), but l wish I
     had not left that place (for I missed what Allah's
     Apostle had said). 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 414: 

     Narrated Imran bin Husain: 

     I went to the Prophet and tied my she-camel at
     the gate. The people of Bani Tamim came to the
     Prophet who said "O Bani Tamim! Accept the
     good tidings." They said twice, 'You have given
     us the good tidings, now give us something" Then
     some Yemenites came to him and he said,
     "Accept the good tidings, O people of Yemem,
     for Bani Tamim refused them." They said, "We
     accept it, O Allah's Apostle! We have come to
     ask you about this matter (i.e. the start of
     creations)." He said, "First of all, there was
     nothing but Allah, and (then He created His
     Throne). His throne was over the water, and He
     wrote everything in the Book (in the Heaven) and
     created the Heavens and the Earth." Then a man
     shouted, "O Ibn Husain! Your she-camel has
     gone away!" So, I went away and could not see
     the she-camel because of the mirage. By Allah, I
     wished I had left that she-camel (but not that
     gathering). 

     Narrated 'Umar: One day the Prophet stood up
     amongst us for a long period and informed us
     about the beginning of creation (and talked about
     everything in detail) till he mentioned how the
     people of Paradise will enter their places and the
     people of Hell will enter their places. Some
     remembered what he had said, and some forgot
     it. 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 415: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Allah the Most Superior
     said, "The son of Adam slights Me, and he
     should not slight Me, and he disbelieves in Me,
     and he ought not to do so. As for his slighting
     Me, it is that he says that I have a son; and his
     disbelief in Me is his statement that I shall not
     recreate him as I have created (him) before." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 416: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When Allah completed the
     creation, He wrote in His Book which is with
     Him on His Throne, "My Mercy overpowers My
     Anger." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 417: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Al-Harith: 

     from Abu Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman who had a
     dispute with some people on a piece of land, and
     so he went to 'Aisha and told her about it. She
     said, "O Abu Salama, avoid the land, for Allah's
     Apostle said, 'Any person who takes even a
     span of land unjustly, his neck shall be encircled
     with it down seven earths.' " 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 418: 

     Narrated Salim's father: 

     The Prophet said, "Any person who takes a
     piece of land unjustly will sink down the seven
     earths on the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 419: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     The Prophet said. "(The division of time has
     turned to its original form which was current
     when Allah created the Heavens and the Earths.
     The year is of twelve months, out of which four
     months are sacred: Three are in succession
     Dhul-Qa' da, Dhul-Hijja and Muharram, and (the
     fourth is) Rajab of (the tribe of) Mudar which
     comes between Jumadi-ath-Thaniyah and Sha
     ban." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 420: 

     Narrated Said bin Zaid bin Amr bin Nufail: 

     That Arwa sued him before Marwan for a right,
     which she claimed, he had deprived her of. On
     that Said said, "How should I deprive her of her
     right? I testify that I heard Allah's Apostle saying,
     'If anyone takes a span of land unjustly, his neck
     will be encircled with it down seven earths on the
     Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 421: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     The Prophet asked me at sunset, "Do you know
     where the sun goes (at the time of sunset)?" I
     replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better." He
     said, "It goes (i.e. travels) till it prostrates Itself
     underneath the Throne and takes the permission
     to rise again, and it is permitted and then (a time
     will come when) it will be about to prostrate itself
     but its prostration will not be accepted, and it will
     ask permission to go on its course but it will not
     be permitted, but it will be ordered to return
     whence it has come and so it will rise in the west.
     And that is the interpretation of the Statement of
     Allah: "And the sun Runs its fixed course For a
     term (decreed). that is The Decree of (Allah) The
     Exalted in Might, The All-Knowing." (36.38) 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 422: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The sun and the moon will be
     folded up (deprived of their light) on the Day of
     Resurrection." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 423: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "The sun and the moon do not
     eclipse because of someone's death or wife (i.e.
     birth), but they are two signs amongst the Signs
     of Allah. So, if you see them (i.e. eclipse) offer
     the Prayer (of eclipse)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 424: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "The sun and the moon are
     two signs amongst the Signs of Allah. They do
     not eclipse because of someone's death or life.
     So, if you see them (i.e. eclipse), celebrate the
     Praises of Allah (i.e. pray)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 425: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     On the day of a solar eclipse, Allah's Apostle
     stood up (to offer the eclipse prayer). He recited
     Takbir, recited a long recitation (of Holy
     Verses), bowed a long bowing, and then he
     raised h is head saying. "Allah hears him who
     sends his praises to Him." Then he stayed
     standing, recited a long recitation again, but
     shorter than the former, bowed a long bowing,
     but shorter than the first, performed a long
     prostration and then performed the second Rak'a
     in the same way as he had done the first. By the
     time he had finished his prayer with Taslim, the
     solar eclipse had been over. Then he addressed
     the people referring to the solar and lunar
     eclipses saying, "These are two signs amongst the
     Signs of Allah, and they do not eclipse because
     of anyone's death or life. So, if you see them,
     hasten for the Prayer." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 426: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet said, "the sun and the moon do not
     eclipse because of the death or life of someone,
     but they are two signs amongst the Signs of
     Allah. So, if you see them, offer the Prayer (of
     eclipse)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 427: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "I have been made victorious
     with the Saba (i.e. easterly wind) and the people
     of 'Ad were destroyed with the Dabur (i.e.
     westerly wind) ." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 428: 

     Narrated Ata: 

     'Aisha said If the Prophet saw a cloud In the sky,
     he would walk to and fro in agitation, go out and
     come in, and the color of his face would change,
     and if it rained, he would feel relaxed." So 'Aisha
     knew that state of his. So the Prophet said, I
     don't know (am afraid), it may be similar to what
     happened to some people referred to in the Holy
     Quran in the following Verse: -- "Then when they
     saw it as a dense cloud coming towards their
     valleys, they said, 'This is a cloud bringing us
     rain!' Nay, but, it is that (torment) which you
     were asking to be hastened a wind wherein is
     severe torment." (46.24) 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 429: 

     Narrated Malik bin Sasaa: 

     The Prophet said, "While I was at the House in a
     state midway between sleep and wakefulness,
     (an angel recognized me) as the man lying
     between two men. A golden tray full of wisdom
     and belief was brought to me and my body was
     cut open from the throat to the lower part of the
     abdomen and then my abdomen was washed
     with Zam-zam water and (my heart was) filled
     with wisdom and belief. Al-Buraq, a white
     animal, smaller than a mule and bigger than a
     donkey was brought to me and I set out with
     Gabriel. When I reached the nearest heaven.
     Gabriel said to the heaven gate-keeper, 'Open
     the gate.' The gatekeeper asked, 'Who is it?' He
     said, 'Gabriel.' The gate-keeper,' Who is
     accompanying you?' Gabriel said, 'Muhammad.'
     The gate-keeper said, 'Has he been called?'
     Gabriel said, 'Yes.' Then it was said, 'He is
     welcomed. What a wonderful visit his is!' Then I
     met Adam and greeted him and he said, 'You are
     welcomed O son and a Prophet.' Then we
     ascended to the second heaven. It was asked,
     'Who is it?' Gabriel said, 'Gabriel.' It was said,
     'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad' It was
     asked, 'Has he been sent for?' He said, 'Yes.' It
     was said, 'He is welcomed. What a wonderful
     visit his is!" Then I met Jesus and Yahya (John)
     who said, 'You are welcomed, O brother and a
     Prophet.' Then we ascended to the third heaven.
     It was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel said, 'Gabriel.'
     It was asked, 'Who is with you? Gabriel said,
     'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been sent
     for?' 'Yes,' said Gabriel. 'He is welcomed. What
     a wonderful visit his is!' (The Prophet added:).
     There I met Joseph and greeted him, and he
     replied, 'You are welcomed, O brother and a
     Prophet!' Then we ascended to the 4th heaven
     and again the same questions and answers were
     exchanged as in the previous heavens. There I
     met Idris and greeted him. He said, 'You are
     welcomed O brother and Prophet.' Then we
     ascended to the 5th heaven and again the same
     questions and answers were exchanged as in
     previous heavens. there I met and greeted Aaron
     who said, 'You are welcomed O brother and a
     Prophet". Then we ascended to the 6th heaven
     and again the same questions and answers were
     exchanged as in the previous heavens. There I
     met and greeted Moses who said, 'You are
     welcomed O brother and. a Prophet.' When I
     proceeded on, he started weeping and on being
     asked why he was weeping, he said, 'O Lord!
     Followers of this youth who was sent after me
     will enter Paradise in greater number than my
     followers.' Then we ascended to the seventh
     heaven and again the same questions and
     answers were exchanged as in the previous
     heavens. There I met and greeted Abraham who
     said, 'You are welcomed o son and a Prophet.'
     Then I was shown Al-Bait-al-Ma'mur (i.e.
     Allah's House). I asked Gabriel about it and he
     said, This is Al Bait-ul-Ma'mur where 70,000
     angels perform prayers daily and when they leave
     they never return to it (but always a fresh batch
     comes into it daily).' Then I was shown
     Sidrat-ul-Muntaha (i.e. a tree in the seventh
     heaven) and I saw its Nabk fruits which
     resembled the clay jugs of Hajr (i.e. a town in
     Arabia), and its leaves were like the ears of
     elephants, and four rivers originated at its root,
     two of them were apparent and two were
     hidden. I asked Gabriel about those rivers and he
     said, 'The two hidden rivers are in Paradise, and
     the apparent ones are the Nile and the
     Euphrates.' Then fifty prayers were enjoined on
     me. I descended till I met Moses who asked me,
     'What have you done?' I said, 'Fifty prayers have
     been enjoined on me.' He said, 'I know the
     people better than you, because I had the
     hardest experience to bring Bani Israel to
     obedience. Your followers cannot put up with
     such obligation. So, return to your Lord and
     request Him (to reduce the number of prayers.' I
     returned and requested Allah (for reduction) and
     He made it forty. I returned and (met Moses)
     and had a similar discussion, and then returned
     again to Allah for reduction and He made it
     thirty, then twenty, then ten, and then I came to
     Moses who repeated the same advice. Ultimately
     Allah reduced it to five. When I came to Moses
     again, he said, 'What have you done?' I said,
     'Allah has made it five only.' He repeated the
     same advice but I said that I surrendered (to
     Allah's Final Order)'" Allah's Apostle was
     addressed by Allah, "I have decreed My
     Obligation and have reduced the burden on My
     slaves, and I shall reward a single good deed as
     if it were ten good deeds." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 430: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mus'ud: 

     Allah's Apostle, the true and truly inspired said,
     "(The matter of the Creation of) a human being is
     put together in the womb of the mother in forty
     days, and then he becomes a clot of thick blood
     for a similar period, and then a piece of flesh for
     a similar period. Then Allah sends an angel who
     is ordered to write four things. He is ordered to
     write down his (i.e. the new creature's) deeds,
     his livelihood, his (date of) death, and whether he
     will be blessed or wretched (in religion). Then the
     soul is breathed into him. So, a man amongst you
     may do (good deeds till there is only a cubit
     between him and Paradise and then what has
     been written for him decides his behavior and he
     starts doing (evil) deeds characteristic of the
     people of the (Hell) Fire. And similarly a man
     amongst you may do (evil) deeds till there is only
     a cubit between him and the (Hell) Fire, and then
     what has been written for him decides his
     behavior, and he starts doing deeds characteristic
     of the people of Paradise." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 431: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "If Allah loves a person, He
     calls Gabriel saying, 'Allah loves so and-so; O
     Gabriel! Love him.' Gabriel would love him and
     make an announcement amongst the inhabitants
     of the Heaven. 'Allah loves so-and-so, therefore
     you should love him also,' and so all the
     inhabitants of the Heaven would love him, and
     then he is granted the pleasure of the people on
     the earth." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 432: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The angels
     descend, the clouds and mention this or that
     matter decreed in the Heaven. The devils listen
     stealthily to such a matter, come down to inspire
     the soothsayers with it, and the latter would add
     to it one-hundred lies of their own." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 433: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "On every Friday the angels
     take heir stand at every gate of the mosques to
     write the names of the people chronologically
     (i.e. according to the time of their arrival for the
     Friday prayer and when the Imam sits (on the
     pulpit) they fold up their scrolls and get ready to
     listen to the sermon." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 434: 

     Narrated Sa'id bin Al-Musaiyab: 

     'Umar came to the Mosque while Hassan was
     reciting a poem. ('Umar disapproved of that). On
     that Hassan said, "I used to recite poetry in this
     very Mosque in the presence of one (i.e. the
     Prophet ) who was better than you." Then he
     turned towards Abu Huraira and said (to him), "I
     ask you by Allah, did you hear Allah's Apostle
     saying (to me), "Retort on my behalf. O Allah!
     Support him (i.e. Hassan) with the Holy Spirit?"
     Abu Huraira said, "Yes." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 435: 

     Narrated Al Bara: 

     The Prophet said to Hassan, "Lampoon them
     (i.e. the pagans) and Gabriel is with you." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 436: 

     Narrated Jarir: 

     as below (Hadith 437). 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 437: 

     Narrated Humaid bin Hilal: 

     Anas bin Malik said, "As if I say a cloud of dust
     swirling up in the lane of Bani Ghanim." Musa
     added, "That was caused by the procession of
     Gabriel." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 438: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Al Harith bin Hisham asked the Prophet, "How
     does the divine inspiration come to you?" He
     replied, "In all these ways: The Angel sometimes
     comes to me with a voice which resembles the
     sound of a ringing bell, and when this state
     abandons me, I remember what the Angel has
     said, and this type of Divine Inspiration is the
     hardest on me; and sometimes the Angel comes
     to me in the shape of a man and talks to me, and
     I understand and remember what he says." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 439: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Who ever spends a
     couple (of objects) in Allah's cause, will be called
     by the Gatekeepers of Paradise who will say, "O
     so-and-so, come on!" Abu Bakr said, "Such a
     person will never perish or be miserable' The
     Prophet said, "I hope you will be among such
     person." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 440: 

     Narrated Abu Salama: 

     'Aisha said that the Prophet said to her "O
     'Aisha' This is Gabriel and he sends his
     (greetings) salutations to you." 'Aisha said,
     "Salutations (Greetings) to him, and Allah's
     Mercy and Blessings be on him," and addressing
     the Prophet she said, "You see what I don't see."


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 441: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle asked Gabriel, "Why don't you
     visit us more often than you do?" Then the
     following Holy Verse was revealed (in this
     respect):-- "And we (angels) descend not but by
     the order of your Lord. To Him belong what is
     before us and what is behind us, and what is
     between those two and your Lord was never
     forgetful." (19.64) 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 442: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Gabriel read the Qur'an to
     me in one way (i.e. dialect) and I continued
     asking him to read it in different ways till he read
     it in seven different ways." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 443: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle was the most generous of all the
     people, and he used to be more generous in the
     month of Ramadan when Gabriel used to meet
     him. Gabriel used to meet him every night in
     Ramadan to study the Holy Quran carefully
     together. Allah's Apostle used to become more
     generous than the fast wind when he met Gabriel 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 444: 

     Narrated Ibn Shihab: 

     Once Umar bin Abdul Aziz delayed the 'Asr
     prayer a little. 'Urwa said to him, "Gabriel
     descended and led the prayer in front of the
     Prophet " On that 'Umar said, "O Urwa! Be sure
     of what you say." "Urwa, "I heard Bashir bin Abi
     Masud narrating from Ibn Masud who heard
     Allah's Apostle saying, 'Gabriel descended and
     led me in prayer; and then prayed with him again,
     and then prayed with him again, and then prayed
     with him again, and then prayed with him again,
     counting with his fingers five prayers." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 445: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     The Prophet said, "Gabriel said to me, 'Whoever
     amongst your followers die without having
     worshipped others besides Allah, will enter
     Paradise (or will not enter the (Hell) Fire)." The
     Prophet asked. "Even if he has committed illegal
     sexual intercourse or theft?" He replied, "Even
     then." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 446: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Angels keep on descending
     from and ascending to the Heaven in turn, some
     at night and some by daytime, and all of them
     assemble together at the time of the Fajr and 'Asr
     prayers. Then those who have stayed with you
     over-night, ascent unto Allah Who asks them,
     and He knows the answer better than they,
     "How have you left My slaves?" They reply, "We
     have left them praying as we found them
     praying." If anyone of you says "Amin" (during
     the Prayer at the end of the recitation of
     Surat-al-Faitiha), and the angels in Heaven say
     the same, and the two sayings coincide, all his
     past sins will be forgiven." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 447: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I stuffed for the Prophet a pillow decorated with
     pictures (of animals) which looked like a
     Namruqa (i.e. a small cushion). He came and
     stood among the people with excitement
     apparent on his face. I said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     What is wrong?" He said, "What is this pillow?" I
     said, "I have prepared this pillow for you, so that
     you may recline on it." He said, "Don't you know
     that angels do not enter a house wherein there
     are pictures; and whoever makes a picture will
     be punished on the Day of Resurrection and will
     be asked to give life to (what he has created)?" 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 448: 

     Narrated Abu Talha: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying; "Angels (of
     Mercy) do not enter a house wherein there is a
     dog or a picture of a living creature (a human
     being or an animal)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 449: 

     Narrated Busr bin Said: 

     That Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani narrated to him
     something in the presence of Said bin 'Ubaidullah
     Al-Khaulani who was brought up in the house of
     Maimuna the wife of the Prophet. Zaid narrated
     to them that Abu Talha said that the Prophet
     said, "The Angels (of Mercy) do not enter a
     house wherein there is a picture." Busr said,
     "Later on Zaid bin Khalid fell ill and we called on
     him. To our surprise we saw a curtain decorated
     with pictures in his house. I said to Ubaidullah
     Al-Khaulani, "Didn't he (i.e. Zaid) tell us about
     the (prohibition of) pictures?" He said, "But he
     excepted the embroidery on garments. Didn't
     you hear him?" I said, "No." He said, "Yes, he
     did." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 450: 

     Narrated Salim's father: 

     Once Gabriel promised the Prophet (that he
     would visit him, but Gabriel did not come) and
     later on he said, "We, angels, do not enter a
     house which contains a picture or a dog." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 451: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When the Imam, during the
     prayer, says, "Allah hears him who praises Him',
     say: 'O Allah! Our Lord! All the praises are for
     You/, for if the saying of anyone of you coincides
     with the saying of the angels, his past sins will be
     forgiven." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 452: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "As long as any-one of you is
     waiting for the prayer, he is considered to be
     praying actually, and the angels say, 'O Allah! Be
     merciful to him and forgive him', (and go on
     saying so) unless he leaves his place of praying or
     passes wind (i.e. breaks his ablution)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 453: 

     Narrated Yali: 

     I heard the Prophet reciting the following Verse
     on the pulpit: "They will call: O Mali......' and
     Sufyan said that 'Abdullah recited it: 'They will
     call: O Mali..' (43.77) 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 454: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     That she asked the Prophet , 'Have you
     encountered a day harder than the day of the
     battle) of Uhud?" The Prophet replied, "Your
     tribes have troubled me a lot, and the worse
     trouble was the trouble on the day of 'Aqaba
     when I presented myself to Ibn 'Abd-Yalail bin
     'Abd-Kulal and he did not respond to my
     demand. So I departed, overwhelmed with
     excessive sorrow, and proceeded on, and could
     not relax till I found myself at Qarnath-Tha-alib
     where I lifted my head towards the sky to see a
     cloud shading me unexpectedly. I looked up and
     saw Gabriel in it. He called me saying, 'Allah has
     heard your people's saying to you, and what they
     have replied back to you, Allah has sent the
     Angel of the Mountains to you so that you may
     order him to do whatever you wish to these
     people.' The Angel of the Mountains called and
     greeted me, and then said, "O Muhammad!
     Order what you wish. If you like, I will let
     Al-Akh-Shabain (i.e. two mountains) fall on
     them." The Prophet said, "No but I hope that
     Allah will let them beget children who will
     worship Allah Alone, and will worship None
     besides Him." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 455: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq-Ash-Shaibani: 

     I asked Zir bin Hubaish regarding the Statement
     of Allah: "And was at a distance Of but two
     bow-lengths Or (even) nearer; So did (Allah)
     convey The Inspiration to His slave (Gabriel) and
     then he (Gabriel) Conveyed (that to
     Muhammad). (53.9-10) On that, Zir said, "Ibn
     Mas'ud informed us that the Prophet had seen
     Gabriel having 600 wings." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 456: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     Regarding the Verse: "Indeed he (Muhammad)
     did see. Of the Signs of his Lord, The Greatest!"
     (53.18) That the Prophet had seen a green
     carpet spread all over the horizon of the sky. 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 457: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Whoever claimed that (the Prophet) Muhammad
     saw his Lord, is committing a great fault, for he
     only saw Gabriel in his genuine shape in which he
     was created covering the whole horizon. 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 458: 

     Narrated Masruq: 

     I asked Aisha "What about His Statement:--
     "Then he (Gabriel) approached And came
     closer, And was at a distance Of but two
     bow-lengths Or (even) nearer?" (53.8-9) She
     replied, "It was Gabriel who used to come to the
     Prophet in the figure of a man, but on that
     occasion, he came in his actual and real figure
     and (he was so huge) that he covered the whole
     horizon." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 459: 

     Narrated Samura: 

     The Prophet said, "Last night I saw (in a dream)
     two men coming to me. One of them said, "The
     person who kindles the fire is Malik, the
     gate-keeper of the (Hell) Fire, and I am Gabriel,
     and this is Michael." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 460: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If a husband calls his wife
     to his bed (i.e. to have sexual relation) and she
     refuses and causes him to sleep in anger, the
     angels will curse her till morning." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 461: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     that he heard the Prophet saying, "The Divine
     Inspiration was delayed for a short period but
     suddenly, as I was walking. I heard a voice in the
     sky, and when I looked up towards the sky, to
     my surprise, I saw the angel who had come to
     me in the Hira Cave, and he was sitting on a
     chair in between the sky and the earth. I was so
     frightened by him that I fell on the ground and
     came to my family and said (to them), 'Cover
     me! (with a blanket), cover me!' Then Allah sent
     the Revelation: "O, You wrapped up (In a
     blanket)! (Arise and warn! And your Lord
     magnify And keep pure your garments, And
     desert the idols." (74.1-5) 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 462: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "On the night of my Ascent to
     the Heaven, I saw Moses who was a tall brown
     curly-haired man as if he was one of the men of
     Shan'awa tribe, and I saw Jesus, a man of
     medium height and moderate complexion inclined
     to the red and white colors and of lank hair. I
     also saw Malik, the gate-keeper of the (Hell)
     Fire and Ad-Dajjal amongst the signs which
     Allah showed me." (The Prophet then recited the
     Holy Verse): "So be not you in doubt of meeting
     him' when you met Moses during the night of
     Mi'raj over the heavens" (32.23) 

     Narrated Anas and Abu Bakra: "The Prophet
     said, "The angels will guard Medina from
     Ad-Dajjal (who will not be able to enter the city
     of Medina)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 463: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When anyone of you dies,
     he will be shown his destination both in the
     morning and in the evening, and if he belongs to
     the people of Paradise, he will be shown his
     place in Paradise, and if he is from the people of
     Hell, he will be shown his place in Hell." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 464: 

     Narrated 'Imran bin Husain: 

     The Prophet said, "I looked at Paradise and
     found poor people forming the majority of its
     inhabitants; and I looked at Hell and saw that the
     majority of its inhabitants were women." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 465: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     While we were in the company of the Prophet,
     he said, "While I was asleep, I saw myself in
     Paradise and there I beheld a woman making
     ablution beside a palace, I asked, To whom does
     this palace belong? 'They said, To 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab.' Then I remembered 'Umar's Ghaira
     (concerning women), and so I quickly went away
     from that palace." (When 'Umar heard this from
     the Prophet), he wept and said, "Do you think it
     is likely that I feel Ghaira because of you, O
     Allah's Apostle?" 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 466: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Qais Al-Ashari: 

     The Prophet said, "A tent (in Paradise) is like a
     hollow pearl which is thirty miles in height and on
     every corner of the tent the believer will have a
     family that cannot be seen by the others."
     (Narrated Abu Imran in another narration, "(The
     tent is) sixty miles (in height)") 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 467: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, "I have
     prepared for My Pious slaves things which have
     never been seen by an eye, or heard by an ear,
     or imagined by a human being." If you wish, you
     can recite this Verse from the Holy Quran:--"No
     soul knows what is kept hidden for them, of joy
     as a reward for what they used to do." (32.17) 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 468: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The first group (of people)
     who will enter Paradise will be (glittering) like the
     moon when it is full. They will not spit or blow
     their noses or relieve nature. Their utensils will be
     of gold and their combs of gold and silver; in
     their centers the aloe wood will be used, and
     their sweat will smell like musk. Everyone of
     them will have two wives; the marrow of the
     bones of the wives' legs will be seen through the
     flesh out of excessive beauty. They ( i.e. the
     people of Paradise) will neither have differences
     nor hatred amongst themselves; their hearts will
     be as if one heart and they will be glorifying Allah
     in the morning and in the evening." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 469: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The first batch (of people)
     who will enter Paradise will be (glittering) like a
     full moon; and those who will enter next will be
     (glittering) like the brightest star. Their hearts will
     be as if the heart of a single man, for they will
     have no enmity amongst themselves, and
     everyone of them shall have two wives, each of
     whom will be so beautiful, pure and transparent
     that the marrow of the bones of their legs will be
     seen through the flesh. They will be glorifying
     Allah in the morning and evening, and will never
     fall ill, and they will neither blow their noses, nor
     spit. Their utensils will be of gold and silver, and
     their combs will be of gold, and the fuel used in
     their centers will be the aloes-wood, and their
     sweat will smell like musk." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 470: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     The Prophet said, "Verily! 70,000 or 700,000 of
     my followers will enter Paradise altogether; so
     that the first and the last amongst them will enter
     at the same time, and their faces will be glittering
     like the bright full moon." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 471: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     A silken cloak was presented to the Prophet and
     he used to forbid the usage of silk (by men).
     When the people were fascinated by the cloak.
     he said, "By Allah in Whose Hands the life of
     Muhammad is, the handkerchiefs of Sad bin
     Mu'adh in Paradise are better than this." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 472: 

     Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib: 

     Allah's Apostle was given a silken garment, and
     its beauty and delicacy astonished the people.
     On that, Allah's Apostle said, "No doubt, the
     handkerchiefs of Sad bin Muadh in Paradise are
     better than this." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 473: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad Al-Saidi: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A place in Paradise equal
     to the size of a lash is better than the whole world
     and whatever is in it." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 474: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "There is a tree in Paradise
     (which is so big and huge that) if a rider travels in
     its shade for one hundred years, he would not be
     able to cross it." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 475: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said "There is a tree in Paradise
     (which is so big and huge that) a rider could
     travel in its shade for a hundred years. And if you
     wish, you can recite:--'In shade long extended..'
     (56. 30) and a place in Paradise equal to an
     arrow bow of one of you, is better than (the
     whole earth) on which the sun rises and sets." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 476: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The first batch (of people)
     who will enter Paradise will be (glittering) like the
     full moon, and the batch next to them will be
     (glittering) like the most brilliant star in the sky.
     Their hearts will be as if the heart of a single man,
     for they will have neither enmity nor jealousy
     amongst themselves; everyone will have two
     wives from the houris, (who will be so beautiful,
     pure and transparent that) the marrow of the
     bones of their legs will be seen through the bones
     and the flesh." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 477: 

     Narrated Al-Bara (bin Azib): 

     The Prophet, after the death of his son Ibrahim,
     said, "There is a wet-nurse for him (i.e. Ibrahim)
     in Paradise." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 478: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet said, "The people of Paradise will
     look at the dwellers of the lofty mansions (i.e. a
     superior place in Paradise) in the same way as
     one looks at a brilliant star far away in the East
     or in the West on the horizon; all that is because
     of their superiority over one another (in
     rewards)." On that the people said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Are these lofty mansions for the
     prophets which nobody else can reach? The
     Prophet replied," No! "By Allah in whose Hands
     my life is, these are for the men who believed in
     Allah and also believed in the Apostles." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 479: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     The Prophet said, "Paradise has eight gates, and
     one of them is called Ar-Raiyan through which
     none will enter but those who observe fasting."
     The Prophet also said, "If a person spends two
     different kinds of something (for Allah's Cause),
     he will be called from the gates of Paradise." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 480: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     While the Prophet was on a journey, he said
     (regarding the performance of the Zuhr prayer),
     "Wait till it (i.e. the weather) gets cooler." He
     said the same again till the shade of the hillocks
     extended. Then he said, "Delay the (Zuhr) Prayer
     till it gets cooler, for the severity of heat is from
     the increase in heat of Hell (fire)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 481: 

     Narrated Abu Sad: The Prophet said, "Delay the
     (Zuhr) Prayer till it gets cooler, for t 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 482: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The (Hell) Fire complained
     to its Lord saying, 'O my Lord! My different
     parts eat up each other.' So, He allowed it to
     take two breaths, one in the winter and the other
     in summer, and this is the reason for the severe
     heat and the bitter cold you find (in weather)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 483: 

     Narrated Abu Jamra Ad-Dabi: 

     I used to sit with Ibn 'Abbas in Mecca. Once I
     had a fever and he said (to me), "Cool your fever
     with Zam-zam water, for Allah's Apostle said: 'It,
     (the Fever) is from the heat of the (Hell) Fire; so,
     cool it with water (or Zam-zam water)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 484: 

     Narrated Rafi bin Khadij: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Fever is from the
     heat of the (Hell) Fire; so cool it with water." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 485: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "Fever is from the heat of the
     (Hell) Fire, so cool it with water." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 486: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "Fever is from the heat of the
     (Hell) Fire; so abate fever with water." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 487: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Your (ordinary) fire is one
     of 70 parts of the (Hell) Fire." Someone asked,
     "O Allah's Apostle This (ordinary) fire would
     have been sufficient (to torture the unbelievers),"
     Allah's Apostle said, "The (Hell) Fire has 69
     parts more than the ordinary (worldly) fire, each
     part is as hot as this (worldly) fire." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 488: 

     Narrated Yali: 

     That he heard the Prophet on the pulpit
     reciting:-- 

     "They will cry: "O Malik!' (43.77) (Malik is the
     gate-keeper (angel) of the (Hell) Fire.) 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 489: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     Somebody said to Usama, "Will you go to
     so-and-so (i.e. 'Uthman) and talk to him (i.e.
     advise him regarding ruling the country)?" He
     said, "You see that I don't talk to him. Really I
     talk to (advise) him secretly without opening a
     gate (of affliction), for neither do I want to be the
     first to open it (i.e. rebellion), nor will I say to a
     man who is my ruler that he is the best of all the
     people after I have heard something from Allah s
     Apostle ." They said, What have you heard him
     saying? He said, "I have heard him saying, "A
     man will be brought on the Day of Resurrection
     and thrown in the (Hell) Fire, so that his intestines
     will come out, and he will go around like a
     donkey goes around a millstone. The people of
     (Hell) Fire will gather around him and say: O
     so-and-so! What is wrong with you? Didn't you
     use to order us to do good deeds and forbid us
     to do bad deeds? He will reply: Yes, I used to
     order you to do good deeds, but I did not do
     them myself, and I used to forbid you to do bad
     deeds, yet I used to do them myself." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 490: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Magic was worked on the Prophet so that he
     began to fancy that he was doing a thing which
     he was not actually doing. One day he invoked
     (Allah) for a long period and then said, "I feel
     that Allah has inspired me as how to cure myself.
     Two persons came to me (in my dream) and sat,
     one by my head and the other by my feet. One of
     them asked the other, "What is the ailment of this
     man?" The other replied, 'He has been
     bewitched" The first asked, 'Who has bewitched
     him?' The other replied, 'Lubaid bin Al-A'sam.'
     The first one asked, 'What material has he used?'
     The other replied, 'A comb, the hair gathered on
     it, and the outer skin of the pollen of the male
     date-palm.' The first asked, 'Where is that?' The
     other replied, 'It is in the well of Dharwan.' " So,
     the Prophet went out towards the well and then
     returned and said to me on his return, "Its
     date-palms (the date-palms near the well) are
     like the heads of the devils." I asked, "Did you
     take out those things with which the magic was
     worked?" He said, "No, for I have been cured
     by Allah and I am afraid that this action may
     spread evil amongst the people." Later on the
     well was filled up with earth. 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 491: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "During your sleep, Satan
     knots three knots at the back of the head of each
     of you, and he breathes the following words at
     each knot, 'The night is, long, so keep on
     sleeping,' If that person wakes up and celebrates
     the praises of Allah, then one knot is undone, and
     when he performs ablution the second knot is
     undone, and when he prays, all the knots are
     undone, and he gets up in the morning lively and
     gay, otherwise he gets up dull and gloomy. " 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 492: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     It was mentioned before the Prophet that there
     was a man who slept the night till morning (after
     sunrise). The Prophet said, "He is a man in
     whose ears (or ear) Satan had urinated." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 493: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "If anyone of you, when having
     sexual relation with his wife, say: 'In the name of
     Allah. O Allah! Protect us from Satan and
     prevent Satan from approaching our offspring
     you are going to give us,' and if he begets a child
     (as a result of that relation) Satan will not harm
     it." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 494: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When the (upper) edge of
     the sun appears (in the morning), don't perform a
     prayer till the sun appears in full, and when the
     lower edge of the sun sets, don't perform a
     prayer till it sets completely. And you should not
     seek to pray at sunrise or sunset for the sun rises
     between two sides of the head of the devil (or
     Satan)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 495: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet said, "If while you are praying,
     somebody intends to pass in front of you,
     prevent him; and should he insist, prevent him
     again; and if he insists again, fight with him (i.e.
     prevent him violently e.g. pushing him violently),
     because such a person is (like) a devil." 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin: Abu Huraira
     said, "Allah's Apostle put me in charge of the
     Zakat of Ramadan (i.e. Zakat-ul-Fitr). Someone
     came to me and started scooping some of the
     foodstuff of (Zakat) with both hands. I caught
     him and told him that I would take him to Allah's
     Apostle." Then Abu Huraira told the whole
     narration and added "He (i.e. the thief) said,
     'Whenever you go to your bed, recite the Verse
     of "Al-Kursi" (2.255) for then a guardian from
     Allah will be guarding you, and Satan will not
     approach you till dawn.' " On that the Prophet
     said, "He told you the truth, though he is a liar,
     and he (the thief) himself was the Satan." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 496: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Satan comes to one of you
     and says, 'Who created so-and-so? 'till he says,
     'Who has created your Lord?' So, when he
     inspires such a question, one should seek refuge
     with Allah and give up such thoughts." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 497: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When the month of
     Ramadan comes, the gates of Paradise are
     opened and the gates of the (Hell) Fire are
     closed, and the devils are chained." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 498: 

     Narrated Ubai bin Kab: 

     That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "(The
     prophet) Moses said to his attendant, "Bring us
     our early meal' (18.62). The latter said, 'Did you
     remember when we betook ourselves to the
     rock? I indeed forgot the fish and none but Satan
     made me forget to remember it." (18.63) Moses
     did not feel tired till he had crossed the place
     which Allah ordered him to go to." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 499: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle pointing towards the east
     saying, "Lo! Afflictions will verily emerge hence;
     afflictions will verily emerge hence where the
     (side of the head of) Satan appears." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 500: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet said, "When nightfalls, then keep
     your children close to you, for the devil spread
     out then. An hour later you can let them free; and
     close the gates of your house (at night), and
     mention Allah's Name thereupon, and cover your
     utensils, and mention Allah's Name thereupon,
     (and if you don't have something to cover your
     utensil) you may put across it something (e.g. a
     piece of wood etc.)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 501: 

     Narrated Safiya bint Huyay: 

     While Allah's Apostle was in Itikaf, I called on
     him at night and having had a talk with him, I got
     up to depart. He got up also to accompany me
     to my dwelling place, which was then in the
     house of Usama bin Zaid. Two Ansari men
     passed by, and when they saw the Prophet they
     hastened away. The Prophet said (to them).
     "Don't hurry! It is Safiya, the daughter of Huyay
     (i.e. my wife)." They said, "Glorified be Allah! O
     Allah's Apostle! (How dare we suspect you?)"
     He said, "Satan circulates in the human mind as
     blood circulates in it, and I was afraid that Satan
     might throw an evil thought (or something) into
     your hearts." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 502: 

     Narrated Sulaiman bin Surd: 

     While I was sitting in the company of the
     Prophet, two men abused each other and the
     face of one of them became red with anger, and
     his jugular veins swelled (i.e. he became furious).
     On that the Prophet said, "I know a word, the
     saying of which will cause him to relax, if he does
     say it. If he says: 'I seek Refuge with Allah from
     Satan.' then all is anger will go away." Some
     body said to him, "The Prophet has said, 'Seek
     refuge with Allah from Satan."' The angry man
     said, "Am I mad?" 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 503: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "If anyone of you, on having
     sexual relation with his wife, says: 'O Allah!
     Protect me from Satan, and prevent Satan from
     approaching the offspring you are going to give
     me,' and if it happens that the lady conceives a
     child, Satan will neither harm it nor be given
     power over it." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 504: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet offered a prayer, and (after
     finishing) he said, "Satan came in front of me
     trying persistently to divert my attention from the
     prayer, but Allah gave me the strength to
     over-power him." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 505: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "When the call for the prayer
     is pronounced, Satan takes to his heels, passing
     wind with noise, When the call for the prayer is
     finished, he comes back. And when the Iqama is
     pronounced, he again takes to his heels, and after
     its completion, he returns again to interfere
     between the (praying) person and his heart,
     saying to him. 'Remember this or that thing.' till
     the person forgets whether he has offered three
     or four Rakat: so if one forgets whether he has
     prayed three or four Rak'a-t, he should perform
     two prostrations of Sahu (i.e. forgetfulness)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 506: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "When any human being is
     born. Satan touches him at both sides of the
     body with his two fingers, except Jesus, the son
     of Mary, whom Satan tried to touch but failed,
     for he touched the placenta-cover instead." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 507: 

     Narrated Alqama: 

     I went to Sham (and asked. "Who is here?"),
     The people said, "Abu Ad-Darda." Abu Darda
     said, "Is the person whom Allah has protected
     against Satan, (as Allah's Apostle said) amongst
     you". The sub-narrator, Mughira said that the
     person who was given Allah's Refuge through the
     tongue of the Prophet was 'Ammar (bin Yasir). 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 508: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "While the angels talk amidst
     the clouds about things that are going to happen
     on earth, the devils hear a word of what they say
     and pour it in the ears of a soothsayer as one
     pours something in a bottle, and they add one
     hundred lies to that (one word)." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 509: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Yawning is from Satan and if
     anyone of you yawns, he should check his
     yawning as much as possible, for if anyone of
     you (during the act of yawning) should say: 'Ha',
     Satan will laugh at him." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 510: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     On the day (of the battle) of Uhud when the
     pagans were defeated, Satan shouted, "O slaves
     of Allah! Beware of the forces at your back,"
     and on that the Muslims of the front files fought
     with the Muslims of the back files (thinking they
     were pagans). Hudhaifa looked back to see his
     father "Al-Yaman," (being attacked by the
     Muslims). He shouted, "O Allah's Slaves! My
     father! My father!" By Allah, they did not stop till
     they killed him. Hudhaifa said, "May Allah
     forgive you." 'Urwa said that Hudhaifa continued
     to do good (invoking Allah to forgive the killer of
     his father till he met Allah (i.e. died). 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 511: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I asked the Prophet about one's looking here and
     there during the prayer. He replied, "It is what
     Satan steals from the prayer of any one of you." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 512: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     as below i.e. Hadith No. 513) 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 513: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     The Prophet said, "A good dream is from Allah,
     and a bad or evil dream is from Satan; so if
     anyone of you has a bad dream of which he gets
     afraid, he should spit on his left side and should
     seek Refuge with Allah from its evil, for then it
     will not harm him." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 514: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If one says one-hundred
     times in one day: "None has the right to be
     worshipped but Allah, the Alone Who has no
     partners, to Him belongs Dominion and to Him
     belong all the Praises, and He has power over all
     things (i.e. Omnipotent)", one will get the reward
     of manumitting ten slaves, and one-hundred good
     deeds will be written in his account, and
     one-hundred bad deeds will be wiped off or
     erased from his account, and on that day he will
     be protected from the morning till evening from
     Satan, and nobody will be superior to him except
     one who has done more than that which he has
     done." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 515: 

     Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas: 

     Once Umar asked the leave to see Allah's
     Apostle in whose company there were some
     Quraishi women who were talking to him and
     asking him for more financial support raising their
     voices. When 'Umar asked permission to enter
     the women got up (quickly) hurrying to screen
     themselves. When Allah's Apostle admitted
     'Umar, Allah's Apostle was smiling, 'Umar
     asked, "O Allah's Apostle! May Allah keep you
     gay always." Allah's Apostle said, "I am
     astonished at these women who were with me.
     As soon as they heard your voice, they hastened
     to screen themselves." 'Umar said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! You have more right to be feared by
     them." Then he addressed (those women) saying,
     "O enemies of your own souls! Do you fear me
     and not Allah's Apostle ?" They replied. "Yes,
     for you are a fearful and fierce man as compared
     with Allah's Apostle." On that Allah's Apostle
     said (to 'Umar), "By Him in Whose Hands my
     life is, whenever Satan sees you taking a path, he
     follows a path other than yours." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 516: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "If anyone of you rouses from
     sleep and performs the ablution, he should wash
     his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it
     out thrice, because Satan has stayed in the upper
     part of his nose all the night." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 517: 

     Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abdullah bin
     Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Sasaa Ansari: 

     That Abu Said Al-Khudri said to his father. "I
     see you are fond of sheep and the desert, so
     when you want to pronounce the Adhan, raise
     your voice with it for whoever will hear the
     Adhan whether a human being, or a Jinn, or
     anything else, will bear witness, in favor on the
     Day of Resurrection." Abu Said added, "I have
     heard this from Allah's Apostle ." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 518: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     That he heard the Prophet delivering a sermon on
     the pulpit saying, "Kill snakes and kill
     Dhu-at-Tufyatain (i.e. a snake with two white
     lines on its back) and ALBATROSS (i.e. a
     snake with short or mutilated tail) for they
     destroy the sight of one's eyes and bring about
     abortion." ('Abdullah bin 'Umar further added):
     Once while I was chasing a snake in order, to kill
     it, Abu Lubaba called me saying: "Don't kill it," I
     said. "Allah's Apostle ordered us to kill snakes."
     He said, "But later on he prohibited the killing of
     snakes living in the houses." (Az-Zubri said.
     "Such snakes are called Al-Awamir.") 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 519: 

     Narrated Abu Said al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There will come a time
     when the best property of a man will be sheep
     which he will graze on the tops of mountains and
     the places where rain falls (i.e. pastures) escaping
     to protect his religion from afflictions." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 520: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The main source of
     disbelief is in the east. Pride and arrogance are
     characteristics of the owners of horses and
     camels, and those bedouins who are busy with
     their camels and pay no attention to Religion;
     while modesty and gentleness are the
     characteristics of the owners of sheep." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 521: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Umar and Abu Mas'ud: 

     Allah's Apostle pointed with his hand towards
     Yemen and said, "True Belief is Yemenite yonder
     (i.e. the Yemenite, had True Belief and embraced
     Islam readily), but sternness and mercilessness
     are the qualities of those who are busy with their
     camels and pay no attention to the Religion
     where the two sides of the head of Satan will
     appear. Such qualities belong to the tribe of
     Rabi'a and Mudar." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 522: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "When you hear the crowing
     of cocks, ask for Allah's Blessings for (their
     crowing indicates that) they have seen an angel.
     And when you hear the braying of donkeys, seek
     Refuge with Allah from Satan for (their braying
     indicates) that they have seen a Satan." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 523: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 524: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A group of Israelites were
     lost. Nobody knows what they did. But I do not
     see them except that they were cursed and
     changed into rats, for if you put the milk of a
     she-camel in front of a rat, it will not drink it, but
     if the milk of a sheep is put in front of it, it will
     drink it." I told this to Ka'b who asked me, "Did
     you hear it from the Prophet ?" I said, "Yes."
     Ka'b asked me the same question several times.;
     I said to Ka'b. "Do I read the Torah? (i.e. I tell
     you this from the Prophet.)" 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 525: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The Prophet called the Salamander, a
     mischief-doer. I have not heard him ordering that
     it should be killed. Sad bin Waqqas claims that
     the Prophet ordered that it should be killed. 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 526: 

     Narrated Um Sharik: 

     That the Prophet ordered her to kill
     Salamanders. 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 527: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "Kill the snake with two white
     lines on its back, for it blinds the on-looker and
     causes abortion." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 528: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet ordered that a short-tailed or
     mutilated-tailed snake (i.e. Abtar) should be
     killed, for it blinds the on-looker and causes
     abortion." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 529: 

     Narrated Abu Mulaika: 

     Ibn Umar used to kill snakes, but afterwards he
     forbade their killing and said, "Once the Prophet
     pulled down a wall and saw a cast-off skin of a
     snake in it. He said, 'Look for the snake. 'They
     found it and the Prophet said, "Kill it." For this
     reason I used to kill snakes. Later on I met Abu
     Lubaba who told me the Prophet said, 'Do not
     kill snakes except the short-tailed or
     mutilated-tailed snake with two white lines on its
     back, for it causes abortion and makes one blind.
     So kill it.' " 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 530: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar used to kill snakes but when Abu
     Lubaba informed him that the Prophet had
     forbidden the killing of snakes living in houses, he
     gave up killing them. 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 531: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "Five kinds of animals are
     mischief-doers and can be killed even in the
     Sanctuary: They are the rat the scorpion, the kite,
     the crow and the rabid dog." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 532: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "It is not sinful of a person
     in the state of Ihram to kill any of these five
     animals: The scorpion, the rat, the rabid dog, the
     crow and the kite." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 533: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "Cover your utensils and tie
     your water skins, and close your doors and keep
     your children close to you at night, as the Jinns
     spread out at such time and snatch things away.
     When you go to bed, put out your lights, for the
     mischief-doer (i.e. the rat) may drag away the
     wick of the candle and burn the dwellers of the
     house." Ata said, "The devils." (instead of the
     Jinns). 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 534: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     Once we were in the company of Allah's Apostle
     in a cave. Surat-al-Mursalat (77) was revealed
     there, and we were learning it from Allah's
     Apostle . Suddenly a snake came out of its hole
     and we rushed towards it to kill it, but it hastened
     and entered its hole before we were able to
     catch it. Allah's Apostle said," It has been saved
     from your evil and you have been saved from its
     evil." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 535: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: The Prophet said, "A
     woman entered the (Hell) Fire because of a cat
     w 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 536: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Once while a prophet
     amongst the prophets was taking a rest
     underneath a tree, an ant bit him. He, therefore,
     ordered that his luggage be taken away from
     underneath that tree and then ordered that the
     dwelling place of the ants should be set on fire.
     Allah sent him a revelation:-- "Wouldn't it have
     been sufficient to burn a single ant? (that bit you):
     (See Page 162, chapter No. 153). 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 537: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said "If a house fly falls in the drink
     of anyone of you, he should dip it (in the drink),
     for one of its wings has a disease and the other
     has the cure for the disease." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 538: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A prostitute was forgiven
     by Allah, because, passing by a panting dog near
     a well and seeing that the dog was about to die
     of thirst, she took off her shoe, and tying it with
     her head-cover she drew out some water for it.
     So, Allah forgave her because of that." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 539: 

     Narrated Abu Talha: 

     The Prophet said, "Angels do not enter a house
     witch has either a dog or a picture in it." 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 540: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle ordered that the dogs should be
     killed. 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 541: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If somebody keeps a dog,
     he loses one Qirat (of the reward) of his good
     deeds everyday, except if he keeps it for the
     purpose of agriculture or for the protection of
     livestock. " 


Volume 4, Book 54, Number 542: 

     Narrated Sufyan bin Abi Zuhair Ash-Shani: 

     That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "If
     somebody keeps a dog that is neither used for
     farm work nor for guarding the livestock, he will
     lose one Qirat (of the reward) of his good deeds
     everyday." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 55: 

                Prophets 



Volume 4, Book 55, Number 543: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah created Adam, making
     him 60 cubits tall. When He created him, He said
     to him, "Go and greet that group of angels, and
     listen to their reply, for it will be your greeting
     (salutation) and the greeting (salutations of your
     offspring." So, Adam said (to the angels),
     As-Salamu Alaikum (i.e. Peace be upon you).
     The angels said, "As-salamu Alaika wa
     Rahmatu-l-lahi" (i.e. Peace and Allah's Mercy be
     upon you). Thus the angels added to Adam's
     salutation the expression, 'Wa Rahmatu-l-lahi,'
     Any person who will enter Paradise will resemble
     Adam (in appearance and figure). People have
     been decreasing in stature since Adam's creation.


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 544: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The first group of people
     who will enter Paradise, will be glittering like the
     full moon and those who will follow them, will
     glitter like the most brilliant star in the sky. They
     will not urinate, relieve nature, spit, or have any
     nasal secretions. Their combs will be of gold, and
     their sweat will smell like musk. The aloes-wood
     will be used in their centers. Their wives will be
     houris. All of them will look alike and will
     resemble their father Adam (in statute), sixty
     cubits tall." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 545: 

     Narrated Abu Salama: 

     Um Salama said, "Um Salaim said, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! Allah does not refrain from saying the
     truth! Is it obligatory for a woman to take a bath
     after she gets nocturnal discharge?' He said,
     'Yes, if she notices the water (i.e. discharge).'
     Um Salama smiled and said, 'Does a woman get
     discharge?' Allah's Apostle said. 'Then why does
     a child resemble (its mother)?" 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 546: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When 'Abdullah bin Salam heard the arrival of
     the Prophet at Medina, he came to him and said,
     "I am going to ask you about three things which
     nobody knows except a prophet: What is the
     first portent of the Hour? What will be the first
     meal taken by the people of Paradise? Why does
     a child resemble its father, and why does it
     resemble its maternal uncle" Allah's Apostle said,
     "Gabriel has just now told me of their answers."
     'Abdullah said, "He (i.e. Gabriel), from amongst
     all the angels, is the enemy of the Jews." Allah's
     Apostle said, "The first portent of the Hour will
     be a fire that will bring together the people from
     the east to the west; the first meal of the people
     of Paradise will be Extra-lobe (caudate lobe) of
     fish-liver. As for the resemblance of the child to
     its parents: If a man has sexual intercourse with
     his wife and gets discharge first, the child will
     resemble the father, and if the woman gets
     discharge first, the child will resemble her." On
     that 'Abdullah bin Salam said, "I testify that you
     are the Apostle of Allah." 'Abdullah bin Salam
     further said, "O Allah's Apostle! The Jews are
     liars, and if they should come to know about my
     conversion to Islam before you ask them (about
     me), they would tell a lie about me." The Jews
     came to Allah's Apostle and 'Abdullah went
     inside the house. Allah's Apostle asked (the
     Jews), "What kind of man is 'Abdullah bin Salam
     amongst you?" They replied, "He is the most
     learned person amongst us, and the best amongst
     us, and the son of the best amongst us." Allah's
     Apostle said, "What do you think if he embraces
     Islam (will you do as he does)?" The Jews said,
     "May Allah save him from it." Then 'Abdullah bin
     Salam came out in front of them saying, "I testify
     that None has the right to be worshipped but
     Allah and that Muhammad is the Apostle of
     Allah." Thereupon they said, "He is the evilest
     among us, and the son of the evilest amongst us,"
     and continued talking badly of him. 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 547: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "But for the Israelis, meat
     would not decay and but for Eve, wives would
     never betray their husbands." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 548: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah 's Apostle said, "Treat women nicely, for a
     women is created from a rib, and the most
     curved portion of the rib is its upper portion, so,
     if you should try to straighten it, it will break, but
     if you leave it as it is, it will remain crooked. So
     treat women nicely." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 549: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle, the true and truly inspired said,
     "(as regards your creation), every one of you is
     collected in the womb of his mother for the first
     forty days, and then he becomes a clot for an
     other forty days, and then a piece of flesh for an
     other forty days. Then Allah sends an angel to
     write four words: He writes his deeds, time of his
     death, means of his livelihood, and whether he
     will be wretched or blessed (in religion). Then the
     soul is breathed into his body. So a man may do
     deeds characteristic of the people of the (Hell)
     Fire, so much so that there is only the distance of
     a cubit between him and it, and then what has
     been written (by the angel) surpasses, and so he
     starts doing deeds characteristic of the people of
     Paradise and enters Paradise. Similarly, a person
     may do deeds characteristic of the people of
     Paradise, so much so that there is only the
     distance of a cubit between him and it, and then
     what has been written (by the angel) surpasses,
     and he starts doing deeds of the people of the
     (Hell) Fire and enters the (Hell) Fire." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 550: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah has appointed an angel
     in the womb, and the angel says, 'O Lord! A
     drop of discharge (i.e. of semen), O Lord! a clot,
     O Lord! a piece of flesh.' And then, if Allah
     wishes to complete the child's creation, the angel
     will say. 'O Lord! A male or a female? O Lord!
     wretched or blessed (in religion)? What will his
     livelihood be? What will his age be?' The angel
     writes all this while the child is in the womb of its
     mother." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 551: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah will say to that person
     of the (Hell) Fire who will receive the least
     punishment, 'If you had everything on the earth,
     would you give it as a ransom to free yourself
     (i.e. save yourself from this Fire)?' He will say,
     'Yes.' Then Allah will say, 'While you were in the
     backbone of Adam, I asked you much less than
     this, i.e. not to worship others besides Me, but
     you insisted on worshipping others besides me.' "


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 552: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whenever a person is
     murdered unjustly, there is a share from the
     burden of the crime on the first son of Adam for
     he was the first to start the tradition of
     murdering." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 553: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Once Allah's Apostle stood amongst the people,
     glorified and praised Allah as He deserved and
     then mentioned the Dajjal saying, "l warn you
     against him (i.e. the Dajjal) and there was no
     prophet but warned his nation against him. No
     doubt, Noah warned his nation against him but I
     tell you about him something of which no prophet
     told his nation before me. You should know that
     he is one-eyed, and Allah is not one-eyed." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 554: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Shall I not tell you about
     the Dajjal a story of which no prophet told his
     nation? The Dajjall is one-eyed and will bring
     with him what will resemble Hell and Paradise,
     and what he will call Paradise will be actually
     Hell; so I warn you (against him) as Noah
     warned his nation against him." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 555: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Noah and his nation will
     come (on the Day of Resurrection and Allah will
     ask (Noah), "Did you convey (the Message)?'
     He will reply, 'Yes, O my Lord!' Then Allah will
     ask Noah's nation, 'Did Noah convey My
     Message to you?' They will reply, 'No, no
     prophet came to us.' Then Allah will ask Noah,
     'Who will stand a witness for you?' He will reply,
     'Muhammad and his followers (will stand witness
     for me).' So, I and my followers will stand as
     witnesses for him (that he conveyed Allah's
     Message)." That is, (the interpretation) of the
     Statement of Allah: "Thus we have made you a
     just and the best nation that you might be
     witnesses Over mankind .." (2.143) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 556: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     We were in the company of the Prophet at a
     banquet and a cooked (mutton) forearm was set
     before him, and he used to like it. He ate a
     morsel of it and said, "I will be the chief of all the
     people on the Day of Resurrection. Do you
     know how Allah will gather all the first and the
     last (people) in one level place where an
     observer will be able to see (all) of them and they
     will be able to hear the announcer, and the sun
     will come near to them. Some People will say:
     Don't you see, in what condition you are and the
     state to which you have reached? Why don't you
     look for a person who can intercede for you with
     your Lord? Some people will say: Appeal to
     your father, Adam.' They will go to him and say:
     'O Adam! You are the father of all mankind, and
     Allah created you with His Own Hands, and
     ordered the angels to prostrate for you, and
     made you live in Paradise. Will you not intercede
     for us with your Lord? Don't you see in what
     (miserable) state we are, and to what condition
     we have reached?' On that Adam will reply, 'My
     Lord is so angry as He has never been before
     and will never be in the future; (besides), He
     forbade me (to eat from) the tree, but I
     disobeyed (Him), (I am worried about) myself!
     Myself! Go to somebody else; go to Noah.'
     They will go to Noah and say; 'O Noah! You are
     the first amongst the messengers of Allah to the
     people of the earth, and Allah named you a
     thankful slave. Don't you see in what a
     (miserable) state we are and to what condition
     we have reached? Will you not intercede for us
     with your Lord? Noah will reply: 'Today my
     Lord has become so angry as he had never been
     before and will never be in the future Myself!
     Myself! Go to the Prophet (Muhammad). The
     people will come to me, and I will prostrate
     myself underneath Allah's Throne. Then I will be
     addressed: 'O Muhammad! Raise your head;
     intercede, for your intercession will be accepted,
     and ask (for anything). for you will be given. " 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 557: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle recited the following Verse) in
     the usual tone: 'Fahal-Min-Muddalkir.' (54.15) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 558: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "I have been made victorious
     with As-Saba (i.e. an easterly wind) and the
     people of 'Ad were destroyed by Ad-Dabur (i.e.
     a westerly wind)." Narrated Abu Said: Ali sent a
     piece of gold to the Prophet who distributed it
     among four persons: Al-Aqra' bin Habis
     Al-Hanzali from the tribe of Mujashi, 'Uyaina bin
     Badr Al-Fazari, Zaid At-Ta'i who belonged to
     (the tribe of) Bani Nahban, and 'Alqama bin
     Ulatha Al-'Amir who belonged to (the tribe of)
     Bani Kilab. So the Quraish and the Ansar
     became angry and said, "He (i.e. the Prophet, )
     gives the chief of Najd and does not give us."
     The Prophet said, "I give them) so as to attract
     their hearts (to Islam)." Then a man with sunken
     eyes, prominent checks, a raised forehead, a
     thick beard and a shaven head, came (in front of
     the Prophet ) and said, "Be afraid of Allah, O
     Muhammad!" The Prophet ' said "Who would
     obey Allah if I disobeyed Him? (Is it fair that)
     Allah has trusted all the people of the earth to me
     while, you do not trust me?" Somebody who, I
     think was Khalid bin Al-Walid, requested the
     Prophet to let him chop that man's head off, but
     he prevented him. When the man left, the
     Prophet said, "Among the off-spring of this man
     will be some who will recite the Qur'an but the
     Qur'an will not reach beyond their throats (i.e.
     they will recite like parrots and will not
     understand it nor act on it), and they will
     renegade from the religion as an arrow goes
     through the game's body. They will kill the
     Muslims but will not disturb the idolaters. If I
     should live up to their time' I will kill them as the
     people of 'Ad were killed (i.e. I will kill all of
     them)." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 559: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     I heard the Prophet reciting: "Fahal Min
     Muddakir." (See Hadith No. 557) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 560: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Zam'a: 

     I heard the Prophet while referring to the person
     who had cut the legs of the she-camel (of the
     Prophet Salih), saying, "The man who was
     appointed for doing this job, was a man of honor
     and power in his nation like Abu Zam'a," 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 561: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     When Allah's Apostle landed at Al-Hijr during
     the Ghazwa of Tabuk, he ordered his
     companions not to drink water from its well or
     reserve water from it. They said, "We have
     already kneaded the dough with its water. and
     also filled our bags with its water.'' On that, the
     Prophet ordered them to throw away the dough
     and pour out the water. 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 562: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The people landed at the land of Thamud called
     Al-Hijr along with Allah's Apostle and they took
     water from its well for drinking and kneading the
     dough with it as well. (When Allah's Apostle
     heard about it) he ordered them to pour out the
     water they had taken from its wells and feed the
     camels with the dough, and ordered them to take
     water from the well whence the she-camel (of
     Prophet Salih) used to drink. 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 563: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     When the Prophet passed by (a place called) Al
     Hijr, he said, "Do not enter the house of those
     who were unjust to themselves, unless (you
     enter) weeping, lest you should suffer the same
     punishment as was inflicted upon them." After
     that he covered his face with his sheet cloth while
     he was on the camel-saddle. 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 564: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Do not enter the ruined
     dwellings of those who were unjust to themselves
     unless (you enter) weeping, lest you should suffer
     the same punishment as was inflicted upon them."


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 565: 

     Narrated Zainab bint Jahsh: 

     That the Prophet once came to her in a state of
     fear and said, "None has the right to be
     worshipped but Allah. Woe unto the Arabs from
     a danger that has come near. An opening has
     been made in the wall of Gog and Magog like
     this," making a circle with his thumb and index
     finger. Zainab bint Jahsh said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Shall we be destroyed even though
     there are pious persons among us?" He said,
     "Yes, when the evil person will increase." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 566: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah has made an opening in
     the wall of the Gog and Magog (people) like this,
     and he made with his hand (with the help of his
     fingers). 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 567: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah will say (on the Day of
     Resurrection), 'O Adam.' Adam will reply,
     'Labbaik wa Sa'daik', and all the good is in Your
     Hand.' Allah will say: 'Bring out the people of the
     fire.' Adam will say: 'O Allah! How many are the
     people of the Fire?' Allah will reply: 'From every
     one thousand, take out nine-hundred-and
     ninety-nine.' At that time children will become
     hoary headed, every pregnant female will have a
     miscarriage, and one will see mankind as
     drunken, yet they will not be drunken, but
     dreadful will be the Wrath of Allah." The
     companions of the Prophet asked, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Who is that (excepted) one?" He said,
     "Rejoice with glad tidings; one person will be
     from you and one-thousand will be from Gog
     and Magog." 

     The Prophet further said, "By Him in Whose
     Hands my life is, hope that you will be one-fourth
     of the people of Paradise." We shouted, "Allahu
     Akbar!" He added, "I hope that you will be
     one-third of the people of Paradise." We
     shouted, "Allahu Akbar!" He said, "I hope that
     you will be half of the people of Paradise." We
     shouted, "Allahu Akbar!" He further said, "You
     (Muslims) (compared with non Muslims) are like
     a black hair in the skin of a white ox or like a
     white hair in the skin of a black ox (i.e. your
     number is very small as compared with theirs)." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 568: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "You will be gathered (on the
     Day of Judgment), bare-footed, naked and not
     circumcised." He then recited:--'As We began
     the first creation, We, shall repeat it: A Promise
     We have undertaken: Truly we shall do it.'
     (21.104) He added, "The first to be dressed on
     the Day of Resurrection, will be Abraham, and
     some of my companions will be taken towards
     the left side (i.e. to the (Hell) Fire), and I will say:
     'My companions! My companions!' It will be
     said: 'They renegade from Islam after you left
     them.' Then I will say as the Pious slave of Allah
     (i.e. Jesus) said. 'And I was a witness Over them
     while I dwelt amongst them. When You took me
     up You were the Watcher over them, And You
     are a witness to all things. If You punish them.
     They are Your slaves And if You forgive them,
     Verily you, only You are the All-Mighty, the
     All-Wise." (5.120-121) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 569: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "On the Day of Resurrection
     Abraham will meet his father Azar whose face
     will be dark and covered with dust.(The Prophet
     Abraham will say to him): 'Didn't I tell you not to
     disobey me?' His father will reply: 'Today I will
     not disobey you.' 'Abraham will say: 'O Lord!
     You promised me not to disgrace me on the Day
     of Resurrection; and what will be more
     disgraceful to me than cursing and dishonoring
     my father?' Then Allah will say (to him):' 'I have
     forbidden Paradise for the disbelievers." Then he
     will be addressed, 'O Abraham! Look! What is
     underneath your feet?' He will look and there he
     will see a Dhabh (an animal,) blood-stained,
     which will be caught by the legs and thrown in
     the (Hell) Fire." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 570: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet entered the Ka'ba and found in it
     the pictures of (Prophet) Abraham and Mary.
     On that he said' "What is the matter with them (
     i.e. Quraish)? They have already heard that
     angels do not enter a house in which there are
     pictures; yet this is the picture of Abraham. And
     why is he depicted as practicing divination by
     arrows?" 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 571: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When the Prophet saw pictures in the Ka'ba, he
     did not enter it till he ordered them to be erased.
     When he saw (the pictures of Abraham and
     Ishmael carrying the arrows of divination, he
     said, "May Allah curse them (i.e. the Quraish)!
     By Allah, neither Abraham nor Ishmael practiced
     divination by arrows." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 572: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The people said, "O Allah's Apostle! Who is the
     most honorable amongst the people (in Allah's
     Sight)?" He said, "The most righteous amongst
     them." They said, "We do not ask you, about
     this. " He said, "Then Joseph, Allah's Prophet,
     the son of Allah's Prophet, The son of Allah's
     Prophet the son of Allah's Khalil (i.e. Abraham)."
     They said, "We do not want to ask about this,"
     He said' "Then you want to ask about the
     descent of the Arabs. Those who were the best
     in the pre-lslamic period of ignorance will be the
     best in Islam provided they comprehend the
     religious knowledge." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 573: 

     Narrated Samura: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Two persons came to me
     at night (in dream) (and took me along with
     them). We passed by a tall man who was so tall
     that I was not able to see his head and that
     person was Abraham." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 574: 

     Narrated Mujahid: 

     That when the people mentioned before Ibn
     'Abbas that the Dajjal would have the word
     Kafir, (i.e. unbeliever) or the letters Kafir (the
     root of the Arabic verb 'disbelieve') written on
     his forehead, I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, "I did
     not hear this, but the Prophet said, 'If you want
     to see Abraham, then look at your companion
     (i.e. the Prophet) but Moses was a curly-haired,
     brown man (who used to ride) a red camel, the
     reins of which was made of fires of date-palms.
     As if I were now looking down a valley." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 575: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Abraham did his
     circumcision with an adze at the age of eighty." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 576: 

     Narrated Abu Az-Zinad: 

     (as above in Hadith No. 575) With an adze. 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 577: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Abraham did not tell a lie
     except on three occasions." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 578: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Abraham did not tell a lie except on three
     occasion. Twice for the Sake of Allah when he
     said, "I am sick," and he said, "(I have not done
     this but) the big idol has done it." The (third was)
     that while Abraham and Sarah (his wife) were
     going (on a journey) they passed by (the territory
     of) a tyrant. Someone said to the tyrant, "This
     man (i.e. Abraham) is accompanied by a very
     charming lady." So, he sent for Abraham and
     asked him about Sarah saying, "Who is this
     lady?" Abraham said, "She is my sister."
     Abraham went to Sarah and said, "O Sarah!
     There are no believers on the surface of the earth
     except you and I. This man asked me about you
     and I have told him that you are my sister, so
     don't contradict my statement." The tyrant then
     called Sarah and when she went to him, he tried
     to take hold of her with his hand, but (his hand
     got stiff and) he was confounded. He asked
     Sarah. "Pray to Allah for me, and I shall not harm
     you." So Sarah asked Allah to cure him and he
     got cured. He tried to take hold of her for the
     second time, but (his hand got as stiff as or stiffer
     than before and) was more confounded. He
     again requested Sarah, "Pray to Allah for me,
     and I will not harm you." Sarah asked Allah again
     and he became alright. He then called one of his
     guards (who had brought her) and said, "You
     have not brought me a human being but have
     brought me a devil." The tyrant then gave Hajar
     as a girl-servant to Sarah. Sarah came back (to
     Abraham) while he was praying. Abraham,
     gesturing with his hand, asked, "What has
     happened?" She replied, "Allah has spoiled the
     evil plot of the infidel (or immoral person) and
     gave me Hajar for service." (Abu Huraira then
     addressed his listeners saying, "That (Hajar) was
     your mother, O Bani Ma-is-Sama (i.e. the
     Arabs, the descendants of Ishmael, Hajar's
     son)." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 579: 

     Narrated Um Sharik: 

     Allah's Apostle ordered that the salamander
     should be killed and said, "It (i.e. the salamander)
     blew (the fire) on Abraham." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 580: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     When the Verse:--"It is those who believe and
     do not confuse their belief with wrong ( i.e.
     joining others in worship with Allah" (6.83) was
     revealed, we said, "O Allah's Apostle! Who is
     there amongst us who has not done wrong to
     himself?" He replied, "It is not as you say, for
     'wrong' in the Verse and 'do not confuse their
     belief, with wrong means 'SHIRK' (i.e. joining
     others in worship with Allah). Haven't you heard
     Luqman's saying to his son, 'O my son! Join not
     others in worship with Allah, verily joining others
     in worship with Allah is a great wrong indeed."
     (31.13) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 581: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     One day some meat was given to the Prophet
     and he said, "On the Day of Resurrection Allah
     will gather all the first and the last (people) in one
     plain, and the voice of the announcer will reach
     all of them, and one will be able to see them all,
     and the sun will come closer to them." (The
     narrator then mentioned the narration of
     intercession): "The people will go to Abraham
     and say: 'You are Allah's Prophet and His Khalil
     on the earth. Will you intercede for us with your
     Lord?' Abraham will then remember his lies and
     say: 'Myself! Myself! Go to Moses." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 582: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "May Allah bestow His Mercy
     on the mother of Ishmael! Had she not hastened
     (to fill her water-skin with water from the
     Zam-zam well). Zam-zam would have been a
     stream flowing on the surface of the earth." Ibn
     'Abbas further added, "(The Prophet) Abraham
     brought Ishmael and his mother (to Mecca) and
     she was suckling Ishmael and she had a
     water-skin with her.' 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 583: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The first lady to use a girdle was the mother of
     Ishmael. She used a girdle so that she might hide
     her tracks from Sarah. Abraham brought her and
     her son Ishmael while she was suckling him, to a
     place near the Ka'ba under a tree on the spot of
     Zam-zam, at the highest place in the mosque.
     During those days there was nobody in Mecca,
     nor was there any water So he made them sit
     over there and placed near them a leather bag
     containing some dates, and a small water-skin
     containing some water, and set out homeward.
     Ishmael's mother followed him saying, "O
     Abraham! Where are you going, leaving us in this
     valley where there is no person whose company
     we may enjoy, nor is there anything (to enjoy)?"
     She repeated that to him many times, but he did
     not look back at her Then she asked him, "Has
     Allah ordered you to do so?" He said, "Yes."
     She said, "Then He will not neglect us," and
     returned while Abraham proceeded onwards,
     and on reaching the Thaniya where they could
     not see him, he faced the Ka'ba, and raising both
     hands, invoked Allah saying the following
     prayers: 

     'O our Lord! I have made some of my offspring
     dwell in a valley without cultivation, by Your
     Sacred House (Kaba at Mecca) in order, O our
     Lord, that they may offer prayer perfectly. So fill
     some hearts among men with love towards them,
     and (O Allah) provide them with fruits, so that
     they may give thanks.' (14.37) Ishmael's mother
     went on suckling Ishmael and drinking from the
     water (she had). 

     When the water in the water-skin had all been
     used up, she became thirsty and her child also
     became thirsty. She started looking at him (i.e.
     Ishmael) tossing in agony; She left him, for she
     could not endure looking at him, and found that
     the mountain of Safa was the nearest mountain to
     her on that land. She stood on it and started
     looking at the valley keenly so that she might see
     somebody, but she could not see anybody. Then
     she descended from Safa and when she reached
     the valley, she tucked up her robe and ran in the
     valley like a person in distress and trouble, till she
     crossed the valley and reached the Marwa
     mountain where she stood and started looking,
     expecting to see somebody, but she could not
     see anybody. She repeated that (running
     between Safa and Marwa) seven times." 

     The Prophet said, "This is the source of the
     tradition of the walking of people between them
     (i.e. Safa and Marwa). When she reached the
     Marwa (for the last time) she heard a voice and
     she asked herself to be quiet and listened
     attentively. She heard the voice again and said,
     'O, (whoever you may be)! You have made me
     hear your voice; have you got something to help
     me?" And behold! She saw an angel at the place
     of Zam-zam, digging the earth with his heel (or
     his wing), till water flowed from that place. She
     started to make something like a basin around it,
     using her hand in this way, and started filling her
     water-skin with water with her hands, and the
     water was flowing out after she had scooped
     some of it." 

     The Prophet added, "May Allah bestow Mercy
     on Ishmael's mother! Had she let the Zam-zam
     (flow without trying to control it) (or had she not
     scooped from that water) (to fill her water-skin),
     Zam-zam would have been a stream flowing on
     the surface of the earth." The Prophet further
     added, "Then she drank (water) and suckled her
     child. The angel said to her, 'Don't be afraid of
     being neglected, for this is the House of Allah
     which will be built by this boy and his father, and
     Allah never neglects His people.' The House (i.e.
     Kaba) at that time was on a high place
     resembling a hillock, and when torrents came,
     they flowed to its right and left. She lived in that
     way till some people from the tribe of Jurhum or
     a family from Jurhum passed by her and her
     child, as they (i.e. the Jurhum people) were
     coming through the way of Kada'. They landed in
     the lower part of Mecca where they saw a bird
     that had the habit of flying around water and not
     leaving it. They said, 'This bird must be flying
     around water, though we know that there is no
     water in this valley.' They sent one or two
     messengers who discovered the source of water,
     and returned to inform them of the water. So,
     they all came (towards the water)." The Prophet
     added, "Ishmael's mother was sitting near the
     water. They asked her, 'Do you allow us to stay
     with you?" She replied, 'Yes, but you will have
     no right to possess the water.' They agreed to
     that." The Prophet further said, "Ishmael's mother
     was pleased with the whole situation as she used
     to love to enjoy the company of the people. So,
     they settled there, and later on they sent for their
     families who came and settled with them so that
     some families became permanent residents there.
     The child (i.e. Ishmael) grew up and learnt
     Arabic from them and (his virtues) caused them
     to love and admire him as he grew up, and when
     he reached the age of puberty they made him
     marry a woman from amongst them. 

     After Ishmael's mother had died, Abraham came
     after Ishmael's marriage in order to see his family
     that he had left before, but he did not find
     Ishmael there. When he asked Ishmael's wife
     about him, she replied, 'He has gone in search of
     our livelihood.' Then he asked her about their
     way of living and their condition, and she replied,
     'We are living in misery; we are living in hardship
     and destitution,' complaining to him. He said,
     'When your husband returns, convey my
     salutation to him and tell him to change the
     threshold of the gate (of his house).' When
     Ishmael came, he seemed to have felt something
     unusual, so he asked his wife, 'Has anyone
     visited you?' She replied, 'Yes, an old man of
     so-and-so description came and asked me about
     you and I informed him, and he asked about our
     state of living, and I told him that we were living
     in a hardship and poverty.' On that Ishmael said,
     'Did he advise you anything?' She replied, 'Yes,
     he told me to convey his salutation to you and to
     tell you to change the threshold of your gate.'
     Ishmael said, 'It was my father, and he has
     ordered me to divorce you. Go back to your
     family.' So, Ishmael divorced her and married
     another woman from amongst them (i.e. Jurhum).

     Then Abraham stayed away from them for a
     period as long as Allah wished and called on
     them again but did not find Ishmael. So he came
     to Ishmael's wife and asked her about Ishmael.
     She said, 'He has gone in search of our
     livelihood.' Abraham asked her, 'How are you
     getting on?' asking her about their sustenance and
     living. She replied, 'We are prosperous and
     well-off (i.e. we have everything in abundance).'
     Then she thanked Allah' Abraham said, 'What
     kind of food do you eat?' She said. 'Meat.' He
     said, 'What do you drink?' She said, 'Water." He
     said, "O Allah! Bless their meat and water." The
     Prophet added, "At that time they did not have
     grain, and if they had grain, he would have also
     invoked Allah to bless it." The Prophet added, "If
     somebody has only these two things as his
     sustenance, his health and disposition will be
     badly affected, unless he lives in Mecca." The
     Prophet added," Then Abraham said Ishmael's
     wife, "When your husband comes, give my
     regards to him and tell him that he should keep
     firm the threshold of his gate.' When Ishmael
     came back, he asked his wife, 'Did anyone call
     on you?' She replied, 'Yes, a good-looking old
     man came to me,' so she praised him and added.
     'He asked about you, and I informed him, and he
     asked about our livelihood and I told him that we
     were in a good condition.' Ishmael asked her,
     'Did he give you any piece of advice?' She said,
     'Yes, he told me to give his regards to you and
     ordered that you should keep firm the threshold
     of your gate.' On that Ishmael said, 'It was my
     father, and you are the threshold (of the gate).
     He has ordered me to keep you with me.' 

     Then Abraham stayed away from them for a
     period as long as Allah wished, and called on
     them afterwards. He saw Ishmael under a tree
     near Zamzam, sharpening his arrows. When he
     saw Abraham, he rose up to welcome him (and
     they greeted each other as a father does with his
     son or a son does with his father). Abraham said,
     'O Ishmael! Allah has given me an order.'
     Ishmael said, 'Do what your Lord has ordered
     you to do.' Abraham asked, 'Will you help me?'
     Ishmael said, 'I will help you.' Abraham said,
     Allah has ordered me to build a house here,'
     pointing to a hillock higher than the land
     surrounding it." The Prophet added, "Then they
     raised the foundations of the House (i.e. the
     Ka'ba). Ishmael brought the stones and Abraham
     was building, and when the walls became high,
     Ishmael brought this stone and put it for
     Abraham who stood over it and carried on
     building, while Ishmael was handing him the
     stones, and both of them were saying, 'O our
     Lord! Accept (this service) from us, Verily, You
     are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.' The
     Prophet added, "Then both of them went on
     building and going round the Ka'ba saying: O our
     Lord ! Accept (this service) from us, Verily, You
     are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing." (2.127) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 584: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When Abraham had differences with his wife),
     (because of her jealousy of Hajar, Ishmael's
     mother), he took Ishmael and his mother and
     went away. They had a water-skin with them
     containing some water, Ishmael's mother used to
     drink water from the water-skin so that her milk
     would increase for her child. When Abraham
     reached Mecca, he made her sit under a tree and
     afterwards returned home. Ishmael's mother
     followed him, and when they reached Kada', she
     called him from behind, 'O Abraham! To whom
     are you leaving us?' He replied, '(I am leaving
     you) to Allah's (Care).' She said, 'I am satisfied
     to be with Allah.' She returned to her place and
     started drinking water from the water-skin, and
     her milk increased for her child. When the water
     had all been used up, she said to herself, 'I'd
     better go and look so that I may see somebody.'
     She ascended the Safa mountain and looked,
     hoping to see somebody, but in vain. When she
     came down to the valley, she ran till she reached
     the Marwa mountain. She ran to and fro
     (between the two mountains) many times. They
     she said to herself, 'i'd better go and see the state
     of the child,' she went and found it in a state of
     one on the point of dying. She could not endure
     to watch it dying and said (to herself), 'If I go and
     look, I may find somebody.' She went and
     ascended the Safa mountain and looked for a
     long while but could not find anybody. Thus she
     completed seven rounds (of running) between
     Safa and Marwa. Again she said (to herself), 'I'd
     better go back and see the state of the child.' But
     suddenly she heard a voice, and she said to that
     strange voice, 'Help us if you can offer any help.'
     Lo! It was Gabriel (who had made the voice).
     Gabriel hit the earth with his heel like this (Ibn
     'Abbas hit the earth with his heel to Illustrate it),
     and so the water gushed out. Ishmael's mother
     was astonished and started digging. (Abu
     Al-Qasim) (i.e. the Prophet) said, "If she had left
     the water, (flow naturally without her
     intervention), it would have been flowing on the
     surface of the earth.") Ishmael's mother started
     drinking from the water and her milk increased
     for her child . Afterwards some people of the
     tribe of Jurhum, while passing through the bottom
     of the valley, saw some birds, and that
     astonished them, and they said, 'Birds can only
     be found at a place where there is water.' They
     sent a messenger who searched the place and
     found the water, and returned to inform them
     about it. Then they all went to her and said, 'O
     ishmael's mother! Will you allow us to be with
     you (or dwell with you)?' (And thus they stayed
     there.) Later on her boy reached the age of
     puberty and married a lady from them. Then an
     idea occurred to Abraham which he disclosed to
     his wife (Sarah), 'I want to call on my
     dependents I left (at Mecca).' When he went
     there, he greeted (Ishmael's wife) and said,
     'Where is Ishmael?' She replied, 'He has gone
     out hunting.' Abraham said (to her), 'When he
     comes, tell him to change the threshold of his
     gate.' When he came, she told him the same
     whereupon Ishmael said to her, 'You are the
     threshold, so go to your family (i.e. you are
     divorced).' Again Abraham thought of visiting his
     dependents whom he had left (at Mecca), and he
     told his wife (Sarah) of his intentions. Abraham
     came to Ishmael's house and asked. "Where is
     Ishmael?" Ishmael's wife replied, "He has gone
     out hunting," and added, "Will you stay (for some
     time) and have something to eat and drink?'
     Abraham asked, 'What is your food and what is
     your drink?' She replied, 'Our food is meat and
     our drink is water.' He said, 'O Allah! Bless their
     meals and their drink." Abu Al-Qa-sim (i.e.
     Prophet) said, "Because of Abraham's invocation
     there are blessings (in Mecca)." Once more
     Abraham thought of visiting his family he had left
     (at Mecca), so he told his wife (Sarah) of his
     decision. He went and found Ishmael behind the
     Zam-zam well, mending his arrows. He said, "O
     Ishmael, Your Lord has ordered me to build a
     house for Him." Ishmael said, "Obey (the order
     of) your Lord." Abraham said, "Allah has also
     ordered me that you should help me therein."
     Ishmael said, "Then I will do." So, both of them
     rose and Abraham started building (the Ka'ba)
     while Ishmael went on handing him the stones,
     and both of them were saying, "O our Lord !
     Accept (this service) from us, Verily, You are the
     All-Hearing, the All-Knowing." (2.127). When
     the building became high and the old man (i.e.
     Abraham) could no longer lift the stones (to such
     a high position), he stood over the stone of
     Al-Maqam and Ishmael carried on handing him
     the stones, and both of them were saying, 'O our
     Lord! Accept (this service) from us, Verily You
     are All-Hearing, All-Knowing." (2.127) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 585: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Which mosque was
     first built on the surface of the earth?" He said,
     "Al-Masjid-ul-,Haram (in Mecca)." I said,
     "Which was built next?" He replied "The mosque
     of Al-Aqsa ( in Jerusalem) ." I said, "What was
     the period of construction between the two?" He
     said, "Forty years." He added, "Wherever (you
     may be, and) the prayer time becomes due,
     perform the prayer there, for the best thing is to
     do so (i.e. to offer the prayers in time)." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 586: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     When the mountain of Uhud came in the sight of
     Allah's Apostle he said. "This is a mountain that
     loves us and is loved by us. O Allah! Abraham
     made Mecca a sanctuary, and I make (the area)
     in between these two mountains (of Medina) a
     sanctuary." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 587: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle said (to
     her). "Don't you see that when your folk built the
     Ka'ba, they did not build it on all the foundations
     built by Abraham?" I said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     Why don't we rebuild it on the foundations of
     Abraham?" He said. "But for the fact that your
     folk have recently given up infidelity (I would
     have done so)." 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: Aisha must have heard this
     from Allah's Apostle for I see that Allah's
     Apostle used not to touch the two corners facing
     Al-Hijr only because the House had not been
     built on the foundations of Abraham'' 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 588: 

     Narrated Abu Humaid As-Sa'idi: 

     The people asked, "O Allah's Apostle! How
     shall we (ask Allah to) send blessings on you?"
     Allah's Apostle replied, "Say: O Allah! Send
     Your Mercy on Muhammad and on his wives
     and on his off spring, as You sent Your Mercy
     on Abraham's family; and send Your Blessings
     on Muhammad and on his offspring, as You sent
     Your Blessings on Abraham's family, for You are
     the Most Praise-worthy, the Most Glorious." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 589: 

     Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Laila: 

     Ka'b bin Ujrah met me and said, "Shall I not give
     you a present I got from the Prophet?"
     'Abdur-Rahman said, "Yes, give it to me." I said,
     "We asked Allah's Apostle saying, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! How should one (ask Allah to) send
     blessings on you, the members of the family, for
     Allah has taught us how to salute you (in the
     prayer)?' He said, 'Say: O Allah! Send Your
     Mercy on Muhammad and on the family of
     Muhammad, as You sent Your Mercy on
     Abraham and on the family of Abraham, for You
     are the Most Praise-worthy, the Most Glorious.
     O Allah! Send Your Blessings on Muhammad
     and the family of Muhammad, as You sent your
     Blessings on Abraham and on the family of
     Abraham, for You are the Most Praise-worthy,
     the Most Glorious.' " 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 590: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet used to seek Refuge with Allah for
     Al-Hasan and Al-Husain and say: "Your
     forefather (i.e. Abraham) used to seek Refuge
     with Allah for Ishmael and Isaac by reciting the
     following: 'O Allah! I seek Refuge with Your
     Perfect Words from every devil and from
     poisonous pests and from every evil, harmful,
     envious eye.' " 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 591: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "We are more liable to be in
     doubt than Abraham when he said, 'My Lord!
     Show me how You give life to the dead." . He
     (i.e. Allah) slid: 'Don't you believe then?' He (i.e.
     Abraham) said: "Yes, but (I ask) in order to be
     stronger in Faith." (2.260) And may Allah send
     His Mercy on Lot! He wished to have a
     powerful support. If I were to stay in prison for
     such a long time as Joseph did I would have
     accepted the offer (of freedom without insisting
     on having my guiltless less declared)." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 592: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     The Prophet passed by some persons of the tribe
     of Aslam practicing archery (i.e. the throwing of
     arrows) Allah's Apostle said, "O offspring of
     Ishmael! Practice archery (i.e. arrow throwing)
     as your father was a great archer (i.e.
     arrow-thrower). I am with (on the side of) the
     son of so-and-so-." Hearing that, one of the two
     teams stopped throwing. Allah's Apostle asked
     them, ' Why are you not throwing?" They replied,
     "O Allah's Apostle! How shall we throw when
     you are with the opposite team?" He said,
     "Throw, for I am with you all." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 593: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Some people asked the Prophet: "Who is the
     most honorable amongst the people?" He
     replied, "The most honorable among them is the
     one who is the most Allah-fearing." They said,
     "O Allah's Prophet! We do not ask about this."
     He said, "Then the most honorable person is
     Joseph, Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's
     Prophet, the son of Allah's Prophet, the son of
     Allah's Khalil." They said, "We do not ask about
     this." He said, "Then you want to ask me about
     the Arabs' descent?" They said, "Yes." He said,
     "Those who were best in the pre-lslamic period,
     are the best in Islam, if they comprehend (the
     religious knowledge)." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 594: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "May Allah forgive Lot: He
     wanted to have a powerful support." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 595: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet recited:-- 'Hal-min-Muddakir'
     (54.15) (Is there any that will remember) (and
     avoid evil). 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 596: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "The honorable is the son of
     the honorable, the son the honorable, i.e. Joseph,
     the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of
     Abraham, 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 597: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle was asked, "Who is the most
     honorable amongst the people?" He replied, "The
     most Allah fearing." The people said, "We do not
     want to ask you about this." He said, "The most
     honorable person is Joseph, Allah's Prophet, the
     son of Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's
     Prophet, the son of Allah's Khalil" The people
     said, 'We do not want to ask you about this." He
     said," Then you want to ask me about the origins
     of the Arabs? People are of various origins. The
     best in the pre-lslamic period are the best in
     Islam, provided they comprehend (the religious
     knowledge)." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 598: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     That the Prophet said (to her). "Order Abu Bakr
     to lead the people in prayer." She replied," Abu
     Bakr is a soft-hearted person and when he
     stands at your place, he will weep (so he will not
     be able to lead the prayer)." The Prophet
     repeated the same order and she gave the same
     reply. The narrator, Shuba said that the Prophet
     said on the third or fourth time. "You are (like)
     the female companions of Joseph. Order Abu
     Bakr to lead the prayer. " 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 599: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     When the Prophet fell ill, he said, "Order Abu
     Bakr to lead the people in prayer." 'Aisha said,
     "Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted person. The Prophet
     gave the same order again and she again gave the
     same reply. He again said, "Order Abu Bakr (to
     lead the prayer)! You are (like) the female
     companions of Joseph." Consequently Abu Bakr
     led the people in prayer in the life-time of the
     Prophet 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 600: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah! Save Aiyyash bin
     Abi Rabia (from the unjust treatment of the
     infidels). O Allah! Save Salama bin Hisham. O
     Allah! Send your Punishment on (the tribe of)
     Mudar. O Allah! Let them suffer from years (of
     drought) similar to that inflicted during the
     life-time of Joseph." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 601: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "May Allah bestow His
     Mercy on Lot. He wanted to have a powerful
     support. If I were to stay in prison (for a period
     equal to) the stay of Joseph (prison) and then the
     offer of freedom came to me, then I would have
     accepted it." (See Hadith No. 591) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 602: 

     Narrated Masruq: 

     I asked Um Ruman, 'Aisha's mother about the
     accusation forged against 'Aisha. She said,
     "While I was sitting with 'Aisha, an Ansari
     woman came to us and said, 'Let Allah condemn
     such-and-such person.' I asked her, 'Why do
     you say so?' She replied, 'For he has spread the
     (slanderous) story.' 'Aisha said, 'What story?'
     The woman then told her the story. 'Aisha asked,
     'Have Abu Bakr and Allah's Apostle heard about
     it ?' She said, 'Yes.' 'Aisha fell down senseless
     (on hearing that), and when she came to her
     senses, she got fever and shaking of the body.
     The Prophet came and asked, 'What is wrong
     with her?' I said, 'She has got fever because of a
     story which has been rumored.' 'Aisha got up
     and said, 'By Allah! Even if I took an oath, you
     would not believe me, and if I put forward an
     excuse, You would not excuse me. My example
     and your example is just like that example of
     Jacob and his sons. Against that which you
     assert, it is Allah (Alone) Whose Help can be
     sought.' (12.18) The Prophet left and then Allah
     revealed the Verses (concerning the matter), and
     on that 'Aisha said, 'Thanks to Allah (only) and
     not to anybody else." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 603: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     I asked 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet about the
     meaning of the following Verse: -- "(Respite will
     be granted) 'Until when the apostles give up hope
     (of their people) and thought that they were
     denied (by their people)..............."(12.110)
     'Aisha replied, "Really, their nations did not
     believe them." I said, "By Allah! They were
     definite that their nations treated them as liars and
     it was not a matter of suspecting." 'Aisha said, "O
     'Uraiya (i.e. 'Urwa)! No doubt, they were quite
     sure about it." 

     I said, "May the Verse be read in such a way as
     to mean that the apostles thought that Allah did
     not help them?" Aisha said, "Allah forbid!
     (Impossible) The Apostles did not suspect their
     Lord of such a thing. But this Verse is concerned
     with the Apostles' followers who had faith in their
     Lord and believed in their apostles and their
     period of trials was long and Allah's Help was
     delayed till the apostles gave up hope for the
     conversion of the disbelievers amongst their
     nation and suspected that even their followers
     were shaken in their belief, Allah's Help then
     came to them." Narrated Ibn 'Umar: The Prophet
     said, "The honorable, the son of the honorable,
     the son of the honorable, (was) Joseph, the son
     of Jacob! the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 604: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "While Job was naked, taking
     a bath, a swarm of gold locusts fell on him and he
     started collecting them in his garment. His Lord
     called him, 'O Job! Have I not made you rich
     enough to need what you see? He said, 'Yes, O
     Lord! But I cannot dispense with your Blessing."'


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 605: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet returned to Khadija while his heart
     was beating rapidly. She took him to Waraqa bin
     Naufal who was a Christian convert and used to
     read the Gospels in Arabic Waraqa asked (the
     Prophet), "What do you see?" When he told him,
     Waraqa said, "That is the same angel whom
     Allah sent to the Prophet) Moses. Should I live
     till you receive the Divine Message, I will support
     you strongly." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 606: 

     Narrated Malik bin Sasaa: 

     Allah's Apostle talked to his companions about
     his Night Journey to the Heavens. When he
     reached the fifth Heaven, he met Aaron. (Gabriel
     said to the Prophet), "This is Aaron." The
     Prophet said, "Gabriel greeted and so did I, and
     he returned the greeting saying, 'Welcome, O
     Pious Brother and Pious Prophet." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 607: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "On the night of my
     Ascension to Heaven, I saw (the prophet)
     Moses who was a thin person with lank hair,
     looking like one of the men of the tribe of
     Shanua; and I saw Jesus who was of average
     height with red face as if he had just come out of
     a bathroom. And I resemble prophet Abraham
     more than any of his offspring does. Then I was
     given two cups, one containing milk and the other
     wine. Gabriel said, 'Drink whichever you like.' I
     took the milk and drank it. Gabriel said, 'You
     have accepted what is natural, (True Religion i.e.
     Islam) and if you had taken the wine, your
     followers would have gone astray.' " 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 608: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "One should not say that I am
     better than Jonah (i.e. Yunus) bin Matta." So, he
     mentioned his father Matta. The Prophet
     mentioned the night of his Ascension and said,
     "The prophet Moses was brown, a tall person as
     if from the people of the tribe of Shanu'a. Jesus
     was a curly-haired man of moderate height." He
     also mentioned Malik, the gate-keeper of the
     (Hell) Fire, and Ad-Dajjal. 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 609: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     When the Prophet came to Medina, he found
     (the Jews) fasting on the day of 'Ashura' (i.e.
     10th of Muharram). They used to say: "This is a
     great day on which Allah saved Moses and
     drowned the folk of Pharaoh. Moses observed
     the fast on this day, as a sign of gratitude to
     Allah." The Prophet said, "I am closer to Moses
     than they." So, he observed the fast (on that day)
     and ordered the Muslims to fast on it. 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 610: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     The Prophet said, 'People will be struck
     unconscious on the Day of Resurrection and I
     will be the first to regain consciousness, and
     behold! There I will see Moses holding one of
     the pillars of Allah's Throne. I will wonder
     whether he has become conscious before me of
     he has been exempted, because of his
     unconsciousness at the Tur (mountain) which he
     received (on the earth)." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 611: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Were it not for Bani Israel,
     meat would not decay; and were it not for Eve,
     no woman would ever betray her husband." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 612: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     That he differed with Al-Hur bin Qais Al-Fazari
     regarding the companion of Moses. Ibn 'Abbas
     said that he was Al-Khadir. Meanwhile Ubai bin
     Ka'b passed by them and Ibn 'Abbas called him
     saying, "My friend and I have differed regarding
     Moses' companion whom Moses asked the way
     to meet. Have you heard Allah's Apostle
     mentioning something about him?" He said, "Yes,
     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'While Moses
     was sitting in the company of some Israelites, a
     man came and asked (him), 'Do you know
     anyone who is more learned than you?' Moses
     replied, 'No.' So, Allah sent the Divine
     Inspiration to Moses: 'Yes, Our slave, Khadir (is
     more learned than you).' Moses asked how to
     meet him (i.e. Khadir). So, the fish, was made,
     as a sign for him, and he was told that when the
     fish was lost, he should return and there he would
     meet him. So, Moses went on looking for the
     sign of the fish in the sea. The servant boy of
     Moses said to him, 'Do you know that when we
     were sitting by the side of the rock, I forgot the
     fish, and t was only Satan who made me forget
     to tell (you) about it.' Moses said, That was what
     we were seeking after,' and both of them
     returned, following their footmarks and found
     Khadir; and what happened further to them, is
     mentioned in Allah's Book." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 613: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     I said to Ibn Abbas, "Nauf Al-Bukah claims that
     Moses, the companion of Al-Khadir was not
     Moses (the prophet) of the children of Israel, but
     some other Moses." Ibn 'Abbas said, "Allah's
     enemy (i.e. Nauf) has told a lie. Ubai bin Ka'b
     told us that the Prophet said, 'Once Moses stood
     up and addressed Bani Israel. He was asked
     who was the most learned man amongst the
     people. He said, 'I.' Allah admonished him as he
     did not attribute absolute knowledge to Him
     (Allah). So, Allah said to him, 'Yes, at the
     junction of the two seas there is a Slave of Mine
     who is more learned than you.' Moses said, 'O
     my Lord! How can I meet him?' Allah said,
     'Take a fish and put it in a large basket and you
     will find him at the place where you will lose the
     fish.' Moses took a fish and put it in a basket and
     proceeded along with his (servant) boy, Yusha
     'bin Nun, till they reached the rock where they
     laid their heads (i.e. lay down). Moses slept, and
     the fish, moving out of the basket, fell into the
     sea. It took its way into the sea (straight) as in a
     tunnel. Allah stopped the flow of water over the
     fish and it became like an arch (the Prophet
     pointed out this arch with his hands). They
     travelled the rest of the night, and the next day
     Moses said to his boy (servant), 'Give us our
     food, for indeed, we have suffered much fatigue
     in this journey of ours.' Moses did not feel tired
     till he crossed that place which Allah had ordered
     him to seek after. His boy (servant) said to him,
     'Do you know that when we were sitting near
     that rock, I forgot the fish, and none but Satan
     caused me to forget to tell (you) about it, and it
     took its course into the sea in an amazing way?.'
     So there was a path for the fish and that
     astonished them. Moses said, 'That was what we
     were seeking after.' So, both of them retraced
     their footsteps till they reached the rock. There
     they saw a man Lying covered with a garment.
     Moses greeted him and he replied saying, 'How
     do people greet each other in your land?' Moses
     said, 'I am Moses.' The man asked, 'Moses of
     Bani Israel?' Moses said, 'Yes, I have come to
     you so that you may teach me from those things
     which Allah has taught you.' He said, 'O Moses!
     I have some of the Knowledge of Allah which
     Allah has taught me, and which you do not
     know, while you have some of the Knowledge of
     Allah which Allah has taught you and which I do
     not know.' Moses asked, 'May I follow you?' He
     said, 'But you will not be able to remain patient
     with me for how can you be patient about things
     which you will not be able to understand?'
     (Moses said, 'You will find me, if Allah so will,
     truly patient, and I will not disobey you in aught.')
     So, both of them set out walking along the
     sea-shore, a boat passed by them and they
     asked the crew of the boat to take them on
     board. The crew recognized Al-Khadir and so
     they took them on board without fare. When
     they were on board the boat, a sparrow came
     and stood on the edge of the boat and dipped its
     beak once or twice into the sea. Al-Khadir said
     to Moses, 'O Moses! My knowledge and your
     knowledge have not decreased Allah's
     Knowledge except as much as this sparrow has
     decreased the water of the sea with its beak.'
     Then suddenly Al-Khadir took an adze and
     plucked a plank, and Moses did not notice it till
     he had plucked a plank with the adze. Moses
     said to him, 'What have you done? They took us
     on board charging us nothing; yet you I have
     intentionally made a hole in their boat so as to
     drown its passengers. Verily, you have done a
     dreadful thing.' Al-Khadir replied, 'Did I not tell
     you that you would not be able to remain patient
     with me?' Moses replied, 'Do not blame me for
     what I have forgotten, and do not be hard upon
     me for my fault.' So the first excuse of Moses
     was that he had forgotten. When they had left the
     sea, they passed by a boy playing with other
     boys. 

     Al-Khadir took hold of the boys head and
     plucked it with his hand like this. (Sufyan, the sub
     narrator pointed with his fingertips as if he was
     plucking some fruit.) Moses said to him, "Have
     you killed an innocent person who has not killed
     any person? You have really done a horrible
     thing." Al-Khadir said, "Did I not tell you that
     you could not remain patient with me?' Moses
     said "If I ask you about anything after this, don't
     accompany me. You have received an excuse
     from me.' Then both of them went on till they
     came to some people of a village, and they asked
     its inhabitant for wood but they refused to
     entertain them as guests. Then they saw therein a
     wall which was just going to collapse (and Al
     Khadir repaired it just by touching it with his
     hands). (Sufyan, the sub-narrator, pointed with
     his hands, illustrating how Al-Khadir passed his
     hands over the wall upwards.) Moses said,
     "These are the people whom we have called on,
     but they neither gave us food, nor entertained us
     as guests, yet you have repaired their wall. If you
     had wished, you could have taken wages for it."
     Al-Khadir said, "This is the parting between you
     and me, and I shall tell you the explanation of
     those things on which you could not remain
     patient." The Prophet added, "We wished that
     Moses could have remained patient by virtue of
     which Allah might have told us more about their
     story. (Sufyan the sub-narrator said that the
     Prophet said, "May Allah bestow His Mercy on
     Moses! If he had remained patient, we would
     have been told further about their case.") 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 614: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Al-Khadir was named so
     because he sat over a barren white land, it turned
     green with plantation after (his sitting over it." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 615: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "It was said to Bani Israel,
     Enter the gate (of the town) with humility
     (prostrating yourselves) and saying:
     "Repentance", but they changed the word and
     entered the town crawling on their buttocks and
     saying: "A wheat grain in the hair." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 616: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "(The Prophet) Moses was
     a shy person and used to cover his body
     completely because of his extensive shyness.
     One of the children of Israel hurt him by saying,
     'He covers his body in this way only because of
     some defect in his skin, either leprosy or scrotal
     hernia, or he has some other defect.' Allah
     wished to clear Moses of what they said about
     him, so one day while Moses was in seclusion,
     he took off his clothes and put them on a stone
     and started taking a bath. When he had finished
     the bath, he moved towards his clothes so as to
     take them, but the stone took his clothes and
     fled; Moses picked up his stick and ran after the
     stone saying, 'O stone! Give me my garment!' Till
     he reached a group of Bani Israel who saw him
     naked then, and found him the best of what Allah
     had created, and Allah cleared him of what they
     had accused him of. The stone stopped there and
     Moses took and put his garment on and started
     hitting the stone with his stick. By Allah, the stone
     still has some traces of the hitting, three, four or
     five marks. This was what Allah refers to in His
     Saying:-- "O you who believe! Be you not like
     those Who annoyed Moses, But Allah proved
     his innocence of that which they alleged, And he
     was honorable In Allah's Sight." (33.69) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 617: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     Once the Prophet distributed something (among
     his followers. A man said, "This distribution has
     not been done (with justice) seeking Allah's
     Countenance." I went to the Prophet and told
     him (of that). He became so angry that I saw the
     signs of anger oh his face. Then he said, "May
     Allah bestow His Mercy on Moses, for he was
     harmed more (in a worse manner) than this; yet
     he endured patiently." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 618: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     We were with Allah's Apostle picking the fruits
     of the 'Arak trees, and Allah's Apostle said,
     "Pick the black fruit, for it is the best." The
     companions asked, "Were you a shepherd?" He
     replied, "There was no prophet who was not a
     shepherd." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 619: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Angel of Death was sent to Moses when he
     came to Moses, Moses slapped him on the eye.
     The angel returned to his Lord and said, "You
     have sent me to a Slave who does not want to
     die." Allah said, "Return to him and tell him to put
     his hand on the back of an ox and for every hair
     that will come under it, he will be granted one
     year of life." Moses said, "O Lord! What will
     happen after that?" Allah replied, "Then death."
     Moses said, "Let it come now." Moses then
     requested Allah to let him die close to the Sacred
     Land so much so that he would be at a distance
     of a stone's throw from it." Abu Huraira added,
     "Allah's Apostle said, 'If I were there, I would
     show you his grave below the red sand hill on the
     side of the road." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 620: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A Muslim and a Jew quarreled. The Muslim
     taking an oath, said, "By Him Who has preferred
     Muhammad over all people...!" The Jew said,
     "By Him Who has preferred Moses, over all
     people." The Muslim raised his hand and slapped
     the Jew who came to the Prophet to tell him
     what had happened between him and the
     Muslim. The Prophet said, "Don't give me
     superiority over Moses, for the people will
     become unconscious (on the Day of
     Resurrection) and I will be the first to gain
     consciousness to see Moses standing and holding
     a side of Allah's Throne. I will not know if he has
     been among those people who have become
     unconscious; and that he has gained
     consciousness before me, or he has been
     amongst those whom Allah has exempted." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 621: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Adam and Moses argued
     with each other. Moses said to Adam. 'You are
     Adam whose mistake expelled you from
     Paradise.' Adam said to him, 'You are Moses
     whom Allah selected as His Messenger and as
     the one to whom He spoke directly; yet you
     blame me for a thing which had already been
     written in my fate before my creation?"' Allah's
     Apostle said twice, "So, Adam overpowered
     Moses." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 622: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet once came to us and said, "All the
     nations were displayed in front of me, and I saw
     a large multitude of people covering the horizon.
     Somebody said, 'This is Moses and his
     followers.' " 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 623: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Many amongst men
     reached (the level of) perfection but none
     amongst the women reached this level except
     Asia, Pharaoh's wife, and Mary, the daughter of
     'Imran. And no doubt, the superiority of 'Aisha to
     other women is like the superiority of Tharid (i.e.
     a meat and bread dish) to other meals." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 624: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "None of you should say that I
     am better than Yunus (i.e. Jonah)." Musadded
     added, "Jonah bin Matta." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 625: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "No slave (of Allah) should
     say that I am better than Yunus bin Matta." So
     the Prophet mentioned his father's name with his
     name. 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 626: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Once while a Jew was selling something, he was
     offered a price that he was not pleased with. So,
     he said, "No, by Him Who gave Moses
     superiority over all human beings!" Hearing him,
     an Ansari man got up and slapped him on the
     face and said, "You say: By Him Who Gave
     Moses superiority over all human beings although
     the Prophet (Muhammad) is present amongst
     us!" The Jew went to the Prophet and said, "O
     Abu-l-Qasim! I am under the assurance and
     contract of security, so what right does
     so-and-so have to slap me?" The Prophet asked
     the other, "Why have you slapped". He told him
     the whole story. The Prophet became angry, till
     anger appeared on his face, and said, "Don't give
     superiority to any prophet amongst Allah's
     Prophets, for when the trumpet will be blown,
     everyone on the earth and in the heavens will
     become unconscious except those whom Allah
     will exempt. The trumpet will be blown for the
     second time and I will be the first to be
     resurrected to see Moses holding Allah's Throne.
     I will not know whether the unconsciousness
     which Moses received on the Day of Tur has
     been sufficient for him, or has he got up before
     me. And I do not say that there is anybody who
     is better than Yunus bin Matta." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 627: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "None should say that I am
     better than Yunus bin Matta." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 628: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The reciting of the Zabur (i.e.
     Psalms) was made easy for David. He used to
     order that his riding animals be saddled, and
     would finish reciting the Zabur before they were
     saddled. And he would never eat except from
     the earnings of his manual work." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 629: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Amr: 

     Allah's Apostle was informed that I have said:
     "By Allah, I will fast all the days and pray all the
     nights as long as I live." On that, Allah's Apostle
     asked me. "Are you the one who says: 'I will fast
     all the days and pray all the nights as long as I
     live?' " I said, "Yes, I have said it." He said, "You
     cannot do that. So fast (sometimes) and do not
     fast (sometimes). Pray and sleep. Fast for three
     days a month, for the reward of a good deed is
     multiplied by ten time, and so the fasting of three
     days a month equals the fasting of a year." I said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! I can do (fast) more than
     this." He said, "Fast on every third day. I said: I
     can do (fast) more than that, He said: "Fast on
     alternate days and this was the fasting of David
     which is the most moderate sort of fasting." I
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! I can do (fast) more
     than that." He said, "There is nothing better than
     that." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 630: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Amr bin Al-As: 

     The Prophet said to me, "I have been informed
     that you pray all the nights and observe fast all
     the days; is this true?" I replied, "Yes." He said,
     "If you do so, your eyes will become weak and
     you will get bored. So fast three days a month,
     for this will be the fasting of a whole year, or
     equal to the fasting of a whole year." I said, "I
     find myself able to fast more." He said, "Then fast
     like the fasting of (the Prophet) David who used
     to fast on alternate days and would not flee on
     facing the enemy." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 631: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Amr: 

     Allah's Apostle said to me, "The most beloved
     fasting to Allah was the fasting of (the Prophet)
     David who used to fast on alternate days. And
     the most beloved prayer to Allah was the prayer
     of David who used to sleep for (the first) half of
     the night and pray for 1/3 of it and (again) sleep
     for a sixth of it." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 632: 

     Narrated Mujahid: 

     I asked Ibn 'Abbas, "Should we perform a
     prostration on reciting Surat-Sad?" He recited
     (the Sura) including: 'And among his progeny,
     David, Solomon..(up to)...so follow their
     guidance (6.84-91) And then he said, "Your
     Prophet is amongst those people who have been
     ordered to follow them (i.e. the preceding
     apostles). 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 633: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The prostration in Sura-Sad is not amongst the
     compulsory prostrations, though I saw the
     Prophet prostrating on reciting The Statement of
     Allah:--and to David We gave Solomon (for a
     son). How excellent (a) slave he was ever
     oft-returning in repentance (to us) (38.30) And
     His Statement:-- He said: My Lord Forgive me
     and grant me a kingdom such as shall not belong
     to any other after me.' (38.35) And His
     Statement:-- 'And they followed what the Devils
     gave out (falsely), of magic in the life-time of
     Solomon.' (2.102) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 634: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A strong demon from the
     Jinns came to me yesterday suddenly, so as to
     spoil my prayer, but Allah enabled me to
     overpower him, and so I caught him and
     intended to tie him to one of the pillars of the
     Mosque so that all of you might see him, but I
     remembered the invocation of my brother
     Solomon: 'And grant me a kingdom such as shall
     not belong to any other after me.' (38.35) so I let
     him go cursed." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 635: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Solomon (the son of) David
     said, 'Tonight I will sleep with seventy ladies each
     of whom will conceive a child who will be a
     knight fighting for "Allah's Cause.' His companion
     said, 'If Allah will.' But Solomon did not say so;
     therefore none of those women got pregnant
     except one who gave birth to a half child." The
     Prophet further said, "If the Prophet Solomon
     had said it (i.e. 'If Allah will') he would have
     begotten children who would have fought in
     Allah's Cause." Shuaib and Ibn Abi Az-Zinad
     said, "Ninety (women) is more correct (than
     seventy)." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 636: 

     Narrated Abu Dhaar: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Which mosque was
     built first?" He replied, "Al-Masjid-ul-Haram." I
     asked, "Which (was built) next?" He replied,
     "Al-Masjid-ul-Aqs-a (i.e. Jerusalem)." I asked,
     "What was the period in between them?" He
     replied, "Forty (years)." He then added,
     "Wherever the time for the prayer comes upon
     you, perform the prayer, for all the earth is a
     place of worshipping for you." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 637: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "My example and the
     example o the people is like that of a person who
     lit a fire and let the moths, butterflies and these
     insects fall in it." He also said, "There were two
     women, each of whom had a child with her. A
     wolf came and took away the child of one of
     them, whereupon the other said, 'It has taken
     your child.' The first said, 'But it has taken your
     child.' So they both carried the case before
     David who judged that the living child be given to
     the elder lady. So both of them went to Solomon
     bin David and informed him (of the case). He
     said, 'Bring me a knife so as to cut the child into
     two pieces and distribute it between them.' The
     younger lady said, 'May Allah be merciful to you!
     Don't do that, for it is her (i.e. the other lady's)
     child.' So he gave the child to the younger lady." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 638: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     When the Verse:-- 'Those who believe and mix
     not their belief with wrong." was revealed, the
     companions of the Prophet said, "Who amongst
     us has not mixed his belief with wrong?" Then
     Allah revealed: "Join none in worship with Allah,
     Verily joining others in worship with Allah is a
     great wrong indeed." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 639: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     When the Verse:-- 'Those who believe and mix
     not their belief with wrong.' was revealed, the
     Muslims felt it very hard on them and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Who amongst us does not do
     wrong to himself?" He replied, "The Verse does
     not mean this. But that (wrong) means to
     associate others in worship to Allah: Don't you
     listen to what Luqman said to his son when he
     was advising him," O my son! Join not others in
     worship with Allah. Verily joining others in
     worship with Allah is a great wrong indeed."
     (31.13) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 640: 

     Narrated Malik bin Sasaa: 

     That the Prophet talked to them about the night
     of his Ascension to the Heavens. He said, "(Then
     Gabriel took me) and ascended up till he reached
     the second heaven where he asked for the gate
     to be opened, but it was asked, 'Who is it?'
     Gabriel replied, 'I am Gabriel.' It was asked,
     'Who is accompanying you?' He replied,
     'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been
     called?' He said, 'Yes.' When we reached over
     the second heaven, I saw Yahya (i.e. John) and
     Jesus who were cousins. Gabriel said, 'These are
     John (Yahya) and Jesus, so greet them.' I
     greeted them and they returned the greeting
     saying, 'Welcome, O Pious Brother and Pious
     Prophet!;' " 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 641: 

     Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab: 

     Abu Huraira said, "I heard Allah's Apostle
     saying, 'There is none born among the off-spring
     of Adam, but Satan touches it. A child therefore,
     cries loudly at the time of birth because of the
     touch of Satan, except Mary and her child." Then
     Abu Huraira recited: "And I seek refuge with
     You for her and for her offspring from the
     outcast Satan" (3.36) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 642: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Mary, the daughter
     of 'Imran, was the best among the women (of the
     world of her time) and Khadija is the best
     amongst the women. (of this nation)." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 643: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari: 

     The Prophet said, "The superiority of 'Aisha to
     other ladies is like the superiority of Tharid (i.e.
     meat and bread dish) to other meals. Many men
     reached the level of perfection, but no woman
     reached such a level except Mary, the daughter
     of Imran and Asia, the wife of Pharaoh." 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: I heard Allah's Apostle
     saying, "Amongst all those women who ride
     camels (i.e. Arabs), the ladies of Quraish are the
     best. They are merciful and kind to their
     off-spring and the best guardians of their
     husbands' properties.' Abu Huraira added,
     "Mary the daughter of Imran never rode a
     camel." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 644: 

     Narrated 'Ubada: 

     The Prophet said, "If anyone testifies that None
     has the right to be worshipped but Allah Alone
     Who has no partners, and that Muhammad is His
     Slave and His Apostle, and that Jesus is Allah's
     Slave and His Apostle and His Word which He
     bestowed on Mary and a Spirit created by Him,
     and that Paradise is true, and Hell is true, Allah
     will admit him into Paradise with the deeds which
     he had done even if those deeds were few."
     (Junada, the sub-narrator said, " 'Ubada added,
     'Such a person can enter Paradise through any of
     its eight gates he likes.") 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 645: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "None spoke in cradle but
     three: (The first was) Jesus, (the second was),
     there a man from Bani Israel called Juraij. While
     he was offering his prayers, his mother came and
     called him. He said (to himself), 'Shall I answer
     her or keep on praying?" (He went on praying)
     and did not answer her, his mother said, "O
     Allah! Do not let him die till he sees the faces of
     prostitutes." So while he was in his hermitage, a
     lady came and sought to seduce him, but he
     refused. So she went to a shepherd and
     presented herself to him to commit illegal sexual
     intercourse with her and then later she gave birth
     to a child and claimed that it belonged to Juraij.
     The people, therefore, came to him and
     dismantled his hermitage and expelled him out of
     it and abused him. Juraij performed the ablution
     and offered prayer, and then came to the child
     and said, 'O child! Who is your father?' The child
     replied, 'The shepherd.' (After hearing this) the
     people said, 'We shall rebuild your hermitage of
     gold,' but he said, 'No, of nothing but mud.'(The
     third was the hero of the following story) A lady
     from Bani Israel was nursing her child at her
     breast when a handsome rider passed by her.
     She said, 'O Allah ! Make my child like him.' On
     that the child left her breast, and facing the rider
     said, 'O Allah! Do not make me like him.' The
     child then started to suck her breast again. (Abu
     Huraira further said, "As if I were now looking at
     the Prophet sucking his finger (in way of
     demonstration.") After a while the people passed
     by, with a lady slave and she (i.e. the child's
     mother) said, 'O Allah! Do not make my child
     like this (slave girl)!, On that the child left her
     breast and said, 'O Allah! Make me like her.'
     When she asked why, the child replied, 'The
     rider is one of the tyrants while this slave girl is
     falsely accused of theft and illegal sexual
     intercourse." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 646: 

     Narrated Hisham: 

     from Ma'mar as below. 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 647: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "I met Moses on the night of
     my Ascension to heaven." The Prophet then
     described him saying, as I think, "He was a tall
     person with lank hair as if he belonged to the
     people of the tribe of Shanu's.' The Prophet
     further said, "I met Jesus." The Prophet
     described him saying, "He was one of moderate
     height and was red-faced as if he had just come
     out of a bathroom. I saw Abraham whom I
     resembled more than any of his children did."
     The Prophet further said, "(That night) I was
     given two cups; one full of milk and the other full
     of wine. I was asked to take either of them which
     I liked, and I took the milk and drank it. On that
     it was said to me, 'You have taken the right path
     (religion). If you had taken the wine, your
     (Muslim) nation would have gone astray." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 648: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "I saw Moses, Jesus and
     Abraham (on the night of my Ascension to the
     heavens). Jesus was of red complexion, curly
     hair and a broad chest. Moses was of brown
     complexion, straight hair and tall stature as if he
     was from the people of Az-Zutt." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 649: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     The Prophet mentioned the Massiah Ad-Dajjal in
     front of the people saying, Allah is not one eyed
     while Messsiah, Ad-Dajjal is blind in the right
     eye and his eye looks like a bulging out grape.
     While sleeping near the Ka'ba last night, I saw in
     my dream a man of brown color the best one can
     see amongst brown color and his hair was long
     that it fell between his shoulders. His hair was
     lank and water was dribbling from his head and
     he was placing his hands on the shoulders of two
     men while circumambulating the Kaba. I asked,
     'Who is this?' They replied, 'This is Jesus, son of
     Mary.' Behind him I saw a man who had very
     curly hair and was blind in the right eye,
     resembling Ibn Qatan (i.e. an infidel) in
     appearance. He was placing his hands on the
     shoulders of a person while performing Tawaf
     around the Ka'ba. I asked, 'Who is this? 'They
     replied, 'The Masih, Ad-Dajjal.' " 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 650: 

     Narrated Salim from his father: 

     No, By Allah, the Prophet did not tell that Jesus
     was of red complexion but said, "While I was
     asleep circumambulating the Ka'ba (in my
     dream), suddenly I saw a man of brown
     complexion and lank hair walking between two
     men, and water was dropping from his head. I
     asked, 'Who is this?' The people said, 'He is the
     son of Mary.' Then I looked behind and I saw a
     red-complexioned, fat, curly-haired man, blind in
     the right eye which looked like a bulging out
     grape. I asked, 'Who is this?' They replied, 'He is
     Ad-Dajjal.' The one who resembled to him
     among the people, was Ibn Qatar." (Az-Zuhri
     said, "He (i.e. Ibn Qatan) was a man from the
     tribe Khuza'a who died in the pre-lslamic
     period.") 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 651: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "I am the nearest
     of all the people to the son of Mary, and all the
     prophets are paternal brothers, and there has
     been no prophet between me and him (i.e.
     Jesus)." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 652: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Both in this world and in
     the Hereafter, I am the nearest of all the people
     to Jesus, the son of Mary. The prophets are
     paternal brothers; their mothers are different, but
     their religion is one." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 653: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Jesus, seeing a man stealing,
     asked him, 'Did you steal?, He said, 'No, by
     Allah, except Whom there is None who has the
     right to be worshipped' Jesus said, 'I believe in
     Allah and suspect my eyes." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 654: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Do not exaggerate in
     praising me as the Christians praised the son of
     Mary, for I am only a Slave. So, call me the
     Slave of Allah and His Apostle." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 655: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If a person teaches his
     slave girl good manners properly, educates her
     properly, and then manumits and marries her, he
     will get a double reward. And if a man believes in
     Jesus and then believes in me, he will get a
     double reward. And if a slave fears his Lord (i.e.
     Allah) and obeys his masters, he too will get a
     double reward." 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 656: 

     Narrted Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "You will be resurrected
     (and assembled) bare-footed, naked and
     uncircumcised." The Prophet then recited the
     Divine Verse:-- "As We began the first creation,
     We shall repeat it: A promise We have
     undertaken. Truly we shall do it." (21.104) 

     He added, "The first to be dressed will be
     Abraham. Then some of my companions will
     take to the right and to the left. I will say: 'My
     companions! 'It will be said, 'They had been
     renegades since you left them.' I will then say
     what the Pious Slave Jesus, the son of Mary said:
     'And I was a witness over them while I dwelt
     amongst them; when You did take me up, You
     were the Watcher over them, and You are a
     Witness to all things. If You punish them, they
     are Your slaves, and if you forgive them, You,
     only You are the All-Mighty the All-Wise.' "
     (5.117-118) Narrated Quaggas, "Those were
     the apostates who renegade from Islam during
     the Caliphate of Abu Bakr who fought them". 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 657: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hands
     my soul is, surely (Jesus,) the son of Mary will
     soon descend amongst you and will judge
     mankind justly (as a Just Ruler); he will break the
     Cross and kill the pigs and there will be no Jizya
     (i.e. taxation taken from non Muslims). Money
     will be in abundance so that nobody will accept
     it, and a single prostration to Allah (in prayer) will
     be better than the whole world and whatever is in
     it." Abu Huraira added "If you wish, you can
     recite (this verse of the Holy Book): -- 'And
     there is none Of the people of the Scriptures
     (Jews and Christians) But must believe in him (i.e
     Jesus as an Apostle of Allah and a human being)
     Before his death. And on the Day of Judgment
     He will be a witness Against them." (4.159) (See
     Fateh Al Bari, Page 302 Vol 7) 


Volume 4, Book 55, Number 658: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said "How will you be when the
     son of Mary (i.e. Jesus) descends amongst you
     and he will judge people by the Law of the
     Quran and not by the law of Gospel (Fateh-ul
     Bari page 304 and 305 Vol 7) 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 56: 

   Virtues and Merits of the
     Prophet (pbuh) and his
             Companions 



Volume 4, Book 56, Number 659: 

     Narrated Rabi bin Hirash: 

     'Uqba bin 'Amr said to Hudhaifa, "Won't you
     relate to us of what you have heard from Allah's
     Apostle ?" He said, "I heard him saying, "When
     Al-Dajjal appears, he will have fire and water
     along with him. What the people will consider as
     cold water, will be fire that will burn (things). So,
     if anyone of you comes across this, he should fall
     in the thing which will appear to him as fire, for in
     reality, it will be fresh cold water." Hudhaifa
     added, "I also heard him saying, 'From among
     the people preceding your generation, there was
     a man whom the angel of death visited to capture
     his soul. (So his soul was captured) and he was
     asked if he had done any good deed.' He
     replied, 'I don't remember any good deed.' He
     was asked to think it over. He said, 'I do not
     remember, except that I used to trade with the
     people in the world and I used to give a respite
     to the rich and forgive the poor (among my
     debtors). So Allah made him enter Paradise."
     Hudhaifa further said, "I also heard him saying,
     'Once there was a man on his death-bed, who,
     losing every hope of surviving said to his family:
     When I die, gather for me a large heap of wood
     and make a fire (to burn me). When the fire eats
     my meat and reaches my bones, and when the
     bones burn, take and crush them into powder
     and wait for a windy day to throw it (i.e. the
     powder) over the sea. They did so, but Allah
     collected his particles and asked him: 

     Why did you do so? He replied: For fear of You.
     So Allah forgave him." 'Uqba bin 'Amr said, "I
     heard him saying that the Israeli used to dig the
     grave of the dead (to steal their shrouds)." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 660: 

     Narrated 'Aisha and Ibn 'Abbas: 

     On his death-bed Allah's Apostle put a sheet
     over his-face and when he felt hot, he would
     remove it from his face. When in that state (of
     putting and removing the sheet) he said, "May
     Allah's Curse be on the Jews and the Christians
     for they build places of worship at the graves of
     their prophets." (By that) he intended to warn
     (the Muslim) from what they (i.e. Jews and
     Christians) had done. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 661: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The Israelis used to be ruled
     and guided by prophets: Whenever a prophet
     died, another would take over his place. There
     will be no prophet after me, but there will be
     Caliphs who will increase in number." The people
     asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What do you order
     us (to do)?" He said, "Obey the one who will be
     given the pledge of allegiance first. Fulfil their (i.e.
     the Caliphs) rights, for Allah will ask them about
     (any shortcoming) in ruling those Allah has put
     under their guardianship." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 662: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     The Prophet said, "You will follow the wrong
     ways, of your predecessors so completely and
     literally that if they should go into the hole of a
     mastigure, you too will go there." We said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Do you mean the Jews and the
     Christians?" He replied, "Whom else?" (Meaning,
     of course, the Jews and the Christians.) 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 663: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The people mentioned the fire and the bell (as
     means proposed for announcing the time of
     prayer) and by such a suggestion they referred to
     the Jews and the Christians. But Bilal was
     ordered, "Pronounce the words of the Adhan
     (i.e. call for the prayer) twice and the Iqama
     once only." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 664: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     That she used to hate that one should keep his
     hands on his flanks while praying. She said that
     the Jew used to do so. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 665: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Your period (i.e. the
     Muslims' period) in comparison to the periods of
     the previous nations, is like the period between
     the 'Asr prayer and sunset. And your example in
     comparison to the Jews and the Christians is like
     the example of a person who employed some
     laborers and asked them, 'Who will work for me
     till midday for one Qirat each?' The Jews
     worked for half a day for one Qirat each. The
     person asked, 'Who will do the work for me
     from midday to the time of the 'Asr (prayer) for
     one Qirat each?' The Christians worked from
     midday till the 'Asr prayer for one Qirat. Then
     the person asked, 'Who will do the work for me
     from the 'Asr till sunset for two Qirats each?' "
     The Prophet added, "It is you (i.e. Muslims) who
     are doing the work from the Asr till sunset, so
     you will have a double reward. The Jews and the
     Christians got angry and said, 'We have done
     more work but got less wages.' Allah said, 'Have
     I been unjust to you as regards your rights?' They
     said, 'No.' So Allah said, 'Then it is My Blessing
     which I bestow on whomever I like. " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 666: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     I heard 'Umar saying, "May Allah Curse
     so-and-so! Doesn't he know that the Prophet
     said, 'May Allah curse the Jews for, though they
     were forbidden (to eat) fat, they liquefied it and
     sold it. " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 667: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     The Prophet said, "Convey (my teachings) to the
     people even if it were a single sentence, and tell
     others the stories of Bani Israel (which have been
     taught to you), for it is not sinful to do so. And
     whoever tells a lie on me intentionally, will surely
     take his place in the (Hell) Fire." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 668: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The Jews and the
     Christians do not dye (their grey hair), so you
     shall do the opposite of what they do (i.e. dye
     your grey hair and beards)." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 669: 

     Narrated Jundub: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Amongst the nations
     before you there was a man who got a wound,
     and growing impatient (with its pain), he took a
     knife and cut his hand with it and the blood did
     not stop till he died. Allah said, 'My Slave hurried
     to bring death upon himself so I have forbidden
     him (to enter) Paradise.' " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 670: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     that he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Allah
     willed to test three Israelis who were a Leper, a
     blind man and a bald-headed man. So, he sent
     them an angel who came to the leper and said,
     'What thing do you like most?' He replied,
     "Good color and good skin, for the people have
     a strong aversion to me.' The angel touched him
     and his illness was cured, and he was given a
     good color and beautiful skin. The angel asked
     him, 'What kind of property do you like best?'
     He replied, 'Camels (or cows).' (The narrator is
     in doubt, for either the leper or the bald-headed
     man demanded camels and the other demanded
     cows.) So he (i.e. the leper) was given a
     pregnant she-camei, and the angel said (to him),
     'May Allah bless you in it.' 

     The angel then went to the bald-headed man and
     said, 'What thing do you like most?' He said, 'I
     like good hair and wish to be cured of this
     disease, for the people feel repulsion for me.' The
     angel touched him and his illness was cured, and
     he was given good hair. The angel asked (him),
     'What kind of property do you like bests' He
     replied, 'Cows,' The angel gave him a pregnant
     cow and said, 'May Allah bless you in it.' The
     angel went to the blind man and asked, 'What
     thing do you like best?' He said, '(I like) that
     Allah may restore my eye-sight to me so that I
     may see the people.' The angel touched his eyes
     and Allah gave him back his eye-sight. The angel
     asked him, "What kind of property do you like
     best?' He replied, 'Sheep.' The angel gave him a
     pregnant sheep. Afterwards, all the three
     pregnant animals gave birth to young ones, and
     multiplied and brought forth so much that one of
     the (three) men had a herd of camels filling a
     valley, and one had a herd of cows filling a
     valley, and one had a flock of sheep filling a
     valley. Then the angel, disguised in the shape and
     appearance of a leper, went to the leper and
     said, I am a poor man, who has lost all means of
     livelihood while on a journey. So none will satisfy
     my need except Allah and then you. In the Name
     of Him Who has given you such nice color and
     beautiful skin, and so much property, I ask you
     to give me a camel so that I may reach my
     destination. The man replied, 'I have many
     obligations (so I cannot give you).' The angel
     said, 'I think I know you; were you not a leper to
     whom the people had a strong aversion? Weren't
     you a poor man, and then Allah gave you (all this
     property).' He replied, '(This is all wrong), I got
     this property through inheritance from my
     fore-fathers' The angel said, 'If you are telling a
     lie, then let Allah make you as you were before. '

     Then the angel, disguised in the shape and
     appearance of a bald man, went to the bald man
     and said to him the same as he told the first one,
     and he too answered the same as the first one
     did. The angel said, 'If you are telling a lie, then
     let Allah make you as you were before.' 

     The angel, disguised in the shape of a blind man,
     went to the blind man and said, 'I am a poor man
     and a traveler, whose means of livelihood have
     been exhausted while on a journey. I have
     nobody to help me except Allah, and after Him,
     you yourself. I ask you in the Name of Him Who
     has given you back your eye-sight to give me a
     sheep, so that with its help, I may complete my
     journey' The man said, 'No doubt, I was blind
     and Allah gave me back my eye-sight; I was
     poor and Allah made me rich; so take anything
     you wish from my property. By Allah, I will not
     stop you for taking anything (you need) of my
     property which you may take for Allah's sake.'
     The angel replied, 'Keep your property with you.
     You (i.e 3 men) have been tested and Allah is
     pleased with you and is angry with your two
     companions." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 671: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Once three persons (from
     the previous nations) were traveling, and
     suddenly it started raining and they took shelter in
     a cave. The entrance of the cave got closed while
     they were inside. They said to each other, 'O
     you! Nothing can save you except the truth, so
     each of you should ask Allah's Help by referring
     to such a deed as he thinks he did sincerely (i.e.
     just for gaining Allah's Pleasure).' So one of them
     said, 'O Allah! You know that I had a laborer
     who worked for me for one Faraq (i.e. three
     Sas) of rice, but he departed, leaving it (i.e. his
     wages). I sowed that Faraq of rice and with its
     yield I bought cows (for him). Later on when he
     came to me asking for his wages, I said (to him),
     'Go to those cows and drive them away.' He said
     to me, 'But you have to pay me only a Faraq of
     rice,' I said to him, 'Go to those cows and take
     them, for they are the product of that Faraq (of
     rice).' So he drove them. O Allah! If you
     consider that I did that for fear of You, then
     please remove the rock.' The rock shifted a bit
     from the mouth of the cave. The second one
     said, 'O Allah, You know that I had old parents
     whom I used to provide with the milk of my
     sheep every night. One night I was delayed and
     when I came, they had slept, while my wife and
     children were crying with hunger. I used not to let
     them (i.e. my family) drink unless my parents had
     drunk first. So I disliked to wake them up and
     also disliked that they should sleep without
     drinking it, I kept on waiting (for them to wake)
     till it dawned. O Allah! If You consider that I did
     that for fear of you, then please remove the
     rock.' So the rock shifted and they could see the
     sky through it. The (third) one said, 'O Allah!
     You know that I had a cousin (i.e. my paternal
     uncle's daughter) who was most beloved to me
     and I sought to seduce her, but she refused,
     unless I paid her one-hundred Dinars (i.e. gold
     pieces). So I collected the amount and brought it
     to her, and she allowed me to sleep with her. But
     when I sat between her legs, she said, 'Be afraid
     of Allah, and do not deflower me but legally. 'I
     got up and left the hundred Dinars (for her). O
     Allah! If You consider that I did that for fear of
     you than please remove the rock. So Allah saved
     them and they came out (of the cave)." (This
     Hadith indicates that one can only ask Allah for
     help directly or through his performed good
     deeds. But to ask Allah through dead or absent
     prophets, saints, spirits, holy men, angels etc. is
     absolutely forbidden in Islam and it is a kind of
     disbelief.) 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 672: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While a
     lady was nursing her child, a rider passed by and
     she said, 'O Allah! Don't let my child die till he
     becomes like this (rider).' The child said, 'O
     Allah! Don't make me like him,' and then
     returned to her breast (sucking it). (After a while)
     they passed by a lady who was being pulled and
     teased (by the people). The child's mother said,
     'O Allah! Do not make my child like her.' The
     child said, 'O Allah! Make me like her.' Then he
     said, 'As for the rider, he is an infidel, while the
     lady is accused of illegal sexual intercourse
     (falsely) and she says: Allah is sufficient for me
     (He knows the truth)." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 673: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "While a dog was going round
     a well and was about to die of thirst, an Israeli
     prostitute saw it and took off her shoe and
     watered it. So Allah forgave her because of that
     good deed." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 674: 

     Narrated Humaid bin 'Abdur-Rahman: 

     That he heard Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan (talking)
     on the pulpit in the year when he performed the
     Hajj. He took a tuft of hair that was in the hand
     of an orderly and said, "O people of Medina!
     Where are your learned men? I heard the
     Prophet forbidding such a thing as this (i.e. false
     hair) and he used to say, 'The Israelis were
     destroyed when their ladies practiced this habit
     (of using false hair to lengthen their locks)." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 675: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Amongst the people
     preceding you there used to be 'Muhaddithun'
     (i.e. persons who can guess things that come true
     later on, as if those persons have been inspired
     by a divine power), and if there are any such
     persons amongst my followers, it is 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 676: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet said, "Amongst the men of Bani
     Israel there was a man who had murdered
     ninety-nine persons. Then he set out asking
     (whether his repentance could be accepted or
     not). He came upon a monk and asked him if his
     repentance could be accepted. The monk replied
     in the negative and so the man killed him. He
     kept on asking till a man advised to go to such
     and such village. (So he left for it) but death
     overtook him on the way. While dying, he turned
     his chest towards that village (where he had
     hoped his repentance would be accepted), and
     so the angels of mercy and the angels of
     punishment quarrelled amongst themselves
     regarding him. Allah ordered the village (towards
     which he was going) to come closer to him, and
     ordered the village (whence he had come), to go
     far away, and then He ordered the angels to
     measure the distances between his body and the
     two villages. So he was found to be one span
     closer to the village (he was going to). So he was
     forgiven." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 677: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Once Allah's Apostle; offered the morning prayer
     and then faced the people and said, "While a
     man was driving a cow, he suddenly rode over it
     and beat it. The cow said, "We have not been
     created for this, but we have been created for
     sloughing." On that the people said astonishingly,
     "Glorified be Allah! A cow speaks!" The Prophet
     said, "I believe this, and Abu Bakr and 'Umar
     too, believe it, although neither of them was
     present there. While a person was amongst his
     sheep, a wolf attacked and took one of the
     sheep. The man chased the wolf till he saved it
     from the wolf, where upon the wolf said, 'You
     have saved it from me; but who will guard it on
     the day of the wild beasts when there will be no
     shepherd to guard them except me (because of
     riots and afflictions)? ' " The people said
     surprisingly, "Glorified be Allah! A wolf speaks!"
     The Prophet said, "But I believe this, and Abu
     Bakr and 'Umar too, believe this, although
     neither of them was present there." (See the
     Foot-note of page No. 10 Vol.5) 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 678: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A man bought a piece of
     and from another man, and the buyer found an
     earthenware jar filled with gold in the land. The
     buyer said to the seller. 'Take your gold, as I
     have bought only the land from you, but I have
     not bought the gold from you.' The (former)
     owner of the land said, "I have sold you the land
     with everything in it.' So both of them took their
     case before a man who asked, 'Do you have
     children?' One of them said, "I have a boy.' The
     other said, "I have a girl.' The man said, 'Marry
     the girl to the boy and spend the money on both
     of them and give the rest of it in charity.' " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 679: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Plague was a means of
     torture sent on a group of Israelis (or on some
     people before you). So if you hear of its spread
     in a land, don't approach it, and if a plague
     should appear in a land where you are present,
     then don't leave that land in order to run away
     from it (i.e. plague)." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 680: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) I asked Allah's Apostle
     about the plague. He told me that it was a
     Punishment sent by Allah on whom he wished,
     and Allah made it a source of mercy for the
     believers, for if one in the time of an epidemic
     plague stays in his country patiently hoping for
     Allah's Reward and believing that nothing will
     befall him except what Allah has written for him,
     he will get the reward of a martyr." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 681: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The people of Quraish worried about the lady
     from Bani Makhzum who had committed theft.
     They asked, "Who will intercede for her with
     Allah's Apostle?" Some said, "No one dare to do
     so except Usama bin Zaid the beloved one to
     Allah's Apostle ." When Usama spoke about that
     to Allah's Apostle Allah's Apostle said, (to him),
     "Do you try to intercede for somebody in a case
     connected with Allah's Prescribed Punishments?"
     Then he got up and delivered a sermon saying,
     "What destroyed the nations preceding you, was
     that if a noble amongst them stole, they would
     forgive him, and if a poor person amongst them
     stole, they would inflict Allah's Legal punishment
     on him. By Allah, if Fatima, the daughter of
     Muhammad stole, I would cut off her hand." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 682: 

     Narrated Ibn Mas'ud: 

     I heard a person reciting a (Quranic) Verse in a
     certain way, and I had heard the Prophet reciting
     the same Verse in a different way. So I took him
     to the Prophet and informed him of that but I
     noticed the sign of disapproval on his face, and
     then he said, "Both of you are correct, so don't
     differ, for the nations before you differed, so they
     were destroyed." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 683: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     As if I saw the Prophet talking about one of the
     prophets whose nation had beaten him and
     caused him to bleed, while he was cleaning the
     blood off his face and saying, "O Allah! Forgive
     my nation, for they have no knowledge." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 684: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id: 

     The Prophet said, "Amongst the people
     preceding your age, there was a man whom
     Allah had given a lot of money. While he was in
     his death-bed, he called his sons and said, 'What
     type of father have I been to you? They replied,
     'You have been a good father.' He said, 'I have
     never done a single good deed; so when I die,
     burn me, crush my body, and scatter the resulting
     ashes on a windy day.' His sons did accordingly,
     but Allah gathered his particles and asked (him),
     'What made you do so?' He replied, "Fear of
     you.' So Allah bestowed His Mercy upon him.
     (forgave him)." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 685: 

     Narrated Ribi bin Hirash: 

     'Uqba said to Hudhaifa, "Won't you narrate to us
     what you heard from Allah's Apostle ?" Hudhaifa
     said, "I heard him saying, 'Death approached a
     man and when he had no hope of surviving, he
     said to his family, 'When I die, gather for me
     much wood and build a fire (to burn me),. When
     the fire has eaten my flesh and reached my
     bones, take the bones and grind them and scatter
     the resulting powder in the sea on a hot (or
     windy) day.' (That was done.) But Allah
     collected his particles and asked (him), 'Why did
     you do so?' He replied, 'For fear of You.' So
     Allah forgave him." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 686: 

     Narrated 'Abdu Malik: 

     as above, saying, "On a windy day." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 687: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A man used to give loans
     to the people and used to say to his servant, 'If
     the debtor is poor, forgive him, so that Allah may
     forgive us.' So when he met Allah (after his
     death), Allah forgave him." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 688: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A man used to do sinful
     deeds, and when death came to him, he said to
     his sons, 'After my death, burn me and then crush
     me, and scatter the powder in the air, for by
     Allah, if Allah has control over me, He will give
     me such a punishment as He has never given to
     anyone else.' When he died, his sons did
     accordingly. Allah ordered the earth saying,
     'Collect what you hold of his particles.' It did so,
     and behold! There he was (the man) standing.
     Allah asked (him), 'What made you do what you
     did?' He replied, 'O my Lord! I was afraid of
     You.' So Allah forgave him. " Another narrator
     said "The man said, Fear of You, O Lord!" 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 689: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A lady was punished
     because of a cat which she had imprisoned till it
     died. She entered the (Hell) Fire because of it,
     for she neither gave it food nor water as she had
     imprisoned it, nor set it free to eat from the
     vermin of the earth." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 690: 

     Narrated Abu Masud Uqba: 

     The Prophet said, "One of the sayings of the
     prophets which the people have got, is. 'If you
     do not feel ashamed, then do whatever you like."


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 691: 

     Narrated Abu Mus'ud: 

     The Prophet said, "One of the sayings of the
     prophets which the people have got is, 'If you do
     not feel ashamed, then do whatever you like." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 692: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "While a man was walking,
     dragging his dress with pride, he was caused to
     be swallowed by the earth and will go on sinking
     in it till the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 693: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "We are the last (to come) but
     we will be the foremost on the Day of
     Resurrection, nations were given the Book (i.e.
     Scripture) before us, and we were given the Holy
     Book after them. This (i.e. Friday) is the day
     about which they differed. So the next day (i.e.
     Saturday) was prescribed for the Jews and the
     day after it (i.e. Sunday) for the Christians. It is
     incumbent on every Muslim to wash his head and
     body on a Day (i.e. Friday) (at least) in every
     seven days." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 694: 

     Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab: 

     When Muawiya bin Abu Sufyan came to Medina
     for the last time, he delivered a sermon before us.
     He took out a tuft of hair and said, "I never
     thought that someone other than the Jews would
     do such a thing (i.e. use false hair). The Prophet
     named such a practice, 'Az-Zur' (i.e. falsehood),"
     meaning the use of false hair. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 695: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Regarding the Verse: 'And (We) made you into
     Shu'ub and Qabail-- (49.13) that Shu'uib means
     the big Qabail (i.e. nations) while the Qabail (i.e.
     tribes) means the branch tribes. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 696: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Once Allah's Apostle was asked, "Who is the
     most honorable amongst the people?" He said,
     "The most righteous (i.e. Allah-fearing) amongst
     you." They said, "We do not ask you about this."
     He said, "Then Joseph, the prophet of Allah." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 697: 

     Narrated Kulaib bin Wail: 

     I asked Zainab bint Abi Salama (i.e. daughter of
     the wife of the Prophet, "Tell me about the
     Prophet . Did he belong to the tribe of Mudar?"
     She replied, "Yes, he belonged to the tribe of
     Mudar and was from the offspring of An-Nadr
     bin Kinana." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 698: 

     Narrated Kulaib: 

     I was told by the Rabiba (i.e. daughter of the
     wife of the Prophet) who, I think, was Zainab,
     that the Prophet (forbade the utensils (of wine
     called) Ad-Dubba, Al-Hantam, Al-Muqaiyar
     and Al-Muzaffat. I said to her, 'Tell me as to
     which tribe the Prophet belonged; was he from
     the tribe of Mudar?'' She replied, "He belonged
     to the tribe of Mudar and was from the offspring
     of An-Nadr bin Kinana. " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 699: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "You see that the people
     are of different natures. Those who were the best
     in the pre-lslamic period, are also the best in
     Islam if they comprehend religious knowledge.
     You see that the best amongst the people in this
     respect (i.e. ambition of ruling) are those who
     hate it most. And you see that the worst among
     people is the double faced (person) who appears
     to these with one face and to the others with
     another face (i.e a hypocrite)." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 700: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The tribe of Quraish has
     precedence over the people in this connection
     (i.e the right of ruling). The Muslims follow the
     Muslims amongst them, and the infidels follow
     the infidels amongst them. People are of different
     natures: The best amongst them in the pre-lslamic
     period are the best in Islam provided they
     comprehend the religious knowledge. You will
     find that the best amongst the people in this
     respect (i.e. of ruling) is he who hates it (i.e. the
     idea of ruling) most, till he is given the pledge of
     allegiance." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 701: 

     Narrated Tawus: 

     Ibn 'Abbas recited the Quranic Verse:--'Except
     to be kind to me for my kin-ship to you--"
     (42.23) Said bin Jubair said, "(The Verse
     implies) the kinship of Muhammad." Ibn 'Abbas
     said, "There was not a single house (i.e.
     sub-tribe) of Quraish but had a kinship to the
     Prophet and so the above Verse was revealed in
     this connection, and its interpretation is: 'O
     Quraish! You should keep good relation
     between me (i.e. Muhammad) and you." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 702: 

     Narrated Abi Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet said, "From this side from the east,
     afflictions will appear. Rudeness and lack of
     mercy are characteristics of the rural bedouins
     who are busy with their camels and cows (and
     pay no attention to religion). Such are the tribes
     of Rabi'a and Mudar." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 703: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Pride and
     arrogance are characteristics of the rural
     bedouins while calmness is found among the
     owners of sheep. Belief is Yemenite, and wisdom
     is also Yemenite i.e. the Yemenites are
     well-known for their true belief and wisdom)."
     Abu 'Abdullah (Al-Bukhari) said, "Yemen was
     called so because it is situated to the right of the
     Ka'ba, and Sham was called so because it is
     situated to the left of the Ka'ba." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 704: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Jubair bin Mut'im: 

     That while he was with a delegation from Quraish
     to Muawiya, the latter heard the news that
     'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As said that there
     would be a king from the tribe of Qahtan. On
     that Muawiya became angry, got up and then
     praised Allah as He deserved, and said, "Now
     then, I have heard that some men amongst you
     narrate things which are neither in the Holy
     Book, nor have been told by Allah's Apostle.
     Those men are the ignorant amongst you.
     Beware of such hopes as make the people go
     astray, for I heard Allah's Apostle saying,
     'Authority of ruling will remain with Quraish, and
     whoever bears hostility to them, Allah will
     destroy him as long as they abide by the laws of
     the religion.' " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 705: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "Authority of ruling will remain
     with Quraish, even if only two of them remained."


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 706: 

     Narrated Jubair bin Mut'im: 

     'Uthman bin Affan went (to the Prophet) and
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! You gave property to
     Bani Al-Muttalib and did not give us, although
     we and they are of the same degree of
     relationship to you." The Prophet said, "Only
     Bani Hashim and Bani Al Muttalib are one thing
     (as regards family status)." 

     Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 'Abdullah bin
     Az-Zubair went with some women of the tribe of
     Bani Zuhra to 'Aisha who used to treat them
     nicely because of their relation to Allah's Apostle.


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 707: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The tribe of Quraish, the
     Ansar, the (people of the tribe of) Julhaina,
     Muzaina, Aslam, Ashja', and Ghifar are my
     disciples and have no protectors except Allah
     and His Apostle." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 708: 

     Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 

     'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair was the most beloved
     person to 'Aisha excluding the Prophet and Abu
     Bakr, and he in his turn, was the most devoted to
     her, 'Aisha used not to withhold the money given
     to her by Allah, but she used to spend it in
     charity. ('Abdullah) bin AzZubair said, " 'Aisha
     should be stopped from doing so." (When 'Aisha
     heard this), she said protestingly, "Shall I be
     stopped from doing so? I vow that I will never
     talk to 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair." On that, Ibn
     Az-Zubair asked some people from Quraish and
     particularly the two uncles of Allah's Apostle to
     intercede with her, but she refused (to talk to
     him). Az-Zuhriyun, the uncles of the Prophet,
     including 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Aswad bin
     'Abd Yaghuth and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama
     said to him, "When we ask for the permission to
     visit her, enter her house along with us (without
     taking her leave)." He did accordingly (and she
     accepted their intercession). He sent her ten
     slaves whom she manumitted as an expiation for
     (not keeping) her vow. 'Aisha manumitted more
     slaves for the same purpose till she manumitted
     forty slaves. She said, "I wish I had specified
     what I would have done in case of not fulfilling
     my vow when I made the vow, so that I might
     have done it easily." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 709: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Uthman called Zaid bin Thabit, Abdullah bin
     Az-Zubair, Said bin Al-'As and 'AbdurRahman
     bin Al-Harith bin Hisham, and then they wrote
     the manuscripts of the Holy Qur'an in the form of
     book in several copies. 'Uthman said to the three
     Quraishi persons. " If you differ with Zaid bin
     Thabit on any point of the Quran, then write it in
     the language of Quraish, as the Quran was
     revealed in their language." So they acted
     accordingly. (Said bin Thabit was an Ansari and
     not from Quraish ). 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 710: 

     Narrated Salama: 

     Allah's Apostle passed by some people from the
     tribe of Aslam practicing archery. He said, "O
     children of Ishmael! Throw (arrows), for your
     father was an archer. I am on the side of Bani
     so-and-so," meaning one of the two teams. The
     other team stopped throwing, whereupon the
     Prophet said, "What has happened to them?"
     They replied, "How shall we throw while you are
     with Bani so-and-so?" He said, "Throw for I am
     with all of you." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 711: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     The Prophet said, "If somebody claims to be the
     son of any other than his real father knowingly,
     he but disbelieves in Allah, and if somebody
     claims to belong to some folk to whom he does
     not belong, let such a person take his place in the
     (Hell) Fire." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 712: 

     Narrated Wathila bin Al-Asqa: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Verily, one of the worst
     lies is to claim falsely to be the son of someone
     other than one's real father, or to claim to have
     had a dream one has not had, or to attribute to
     me what I have not said." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 713: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The delegates of 'Abd-ul-Qais came to Allah's
     Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We are
     from the tribe of Rabi'a and the infidels of Mudar
     tribe stand between us and you, so that we
     cannot come to you except in the Sacred
     Months. Therefore we would like you to give us
     some instructions which we may follow and
     convey to our people staying behind us." The
     Prophet said, "I order you to observe four things
     and forbid you (to do) four things: (I order you)
     to believe in Allah testifying that None has the
     right to be worshipped except Allah; to offer the
     prayer perfectly; to pay the Zakat; and to give
     one-fifth of the war booty to Allah. And I forbid
     you to use Ad-Dubba, Al-Hantam, An-Naqir
     and Al-Muzaffat." (These are names of utensils in
     which alcoholic drinks were served.) 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 714: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle on the pulpit saying,
     "Verily, afflictions (will start) from here," pointing
     towards the east, "whence the side of the head of
     Satan comes out." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 715: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "The
     tribes of Quraish, Al-Ansar, Juhaina, Muzaina,
     Aslam, Ghifar and Ashja' are my helpers, and
     they have no protector (i.e. Master) except Allah
     and His Apostle." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 716: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     While Allah's Apostle was on the pulpit, he said,
     "May Allah give the tribe of Ghifar! And may
     Allah save the tribe of Aslam! The tribe of
     'Usaiya have disobeyed Allah and His Apostle." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 717: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "May Allah save the tribe of
     Aslam, and may Allah forgive the tribe of
     Ghifar!" 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 718: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     The Prophet said, "Do you think that the tribes of
     Juhaina, Muzaina, Aslam and Ghifar are better
     than the tribes of Bani Tamim, Bani Asad, Bam
     'Abdullah bin Ghatafan and Bani Amir bin
     Sasaa?" A man said, "They were unsuccessful
     and losers." The Prophet added," (Yes), they are
     better than the tribes of Bani Tamim, Bani Asad,
     Bani Abdullah bin Ghatafan and Bani Amir bin
     Sasaa." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 719: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     Al-Aqra' bin Habis said to the Prophet "Nobody
     gave you the pledge of allegiance but the robbers
     of the pilgrims (i.e. those who used to rob the
     pilgrims) from the tribes of Aslam, Ghifar,
     Muzaina." (Ibn Abi Ya'qub is in doubt whether
     Al-Aqra' added. 'And Juhaina.') The Prophet
     said, "Don't you think that the tribes of Aslam,
     Ghifar, Muzaina (and also perhaps) Juhaina are
     better than the tribes of Bani Tamim, Bani Amir,
     Asad, and Ghatafan?" Somebody said, "They
     were unsuccessful and losers!" The Prophet said,
     "Yes, by Him in Whose Hands my life is, they
     (i.e. the former) are better than they (i.e. the
     latter)." 

     Abu Huraira said, "(The Prophet said), '(The
     people of) Bani Aslam, Ghifar and some people
     of Muzaina (or some people of Juhaina or
     Muzaina) are better in Allah's Sight (or on the
     Day of Resurrection) than the tribes of Asad,
     Tamim, Hawazin and Ghatafan.' " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 720: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     We were in the company of the Prophet in a
     Ghazwa. A large number of emigrants joined him
     and among the emigrants there was a person
     who used to play jokes (or play with spears); so
     he (jokingly) stroked an Ansari man on the hip.
     The Ans-ari got so angry that both of them called
     their people. The Ansari said, "Help, O Ansar!"
     And the emigrant said "Help, O emigrants!" The
     Prophet came out and said, "What is wrong with
     the people (as they are calling) this call of the
     period of Ignorance? "Then he said, "What is the
     matter with them?" So he was told about the
     stroke of the emigrant to the Ansari. The Prophet
     said, "Stop this (i.e. appeal for help) for it is an
     evil call. "Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul (a
     hypocrite) said, "The emigrants have called and
     (gathered against us); so when we return to
     Medina, surely, the more honorable people will
     expel therefrom the meaner," Upon that 'Umar
     said, "O Allah's Prophet! Shall we not kill this
     evil person (i.e. Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul) ?"
     The Prophet) said, "(No), lest the people should
     say that Muhammad used to kill his companions."


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 721: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud): 

     The Prophet said, "Who-ever slaps his face or
     tears the bosom of his dress, or calls the calls of
     the Period of Ignorance, is not from us." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 722: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "'Amr bin Luhai bin Qam'a
     bin Khindif was the father of Khuza'a.' 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 723: 

     Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab: 

     Al-Bahira was an animal whose milk was spared
     for the idols and other dieties, and so nobody
     was allowed to milk it. As-Saiba was an animal
     which they (i.e infidels) used to set free in the
     names of their gods so that it would not be used
     for carrying anything. Abu Huraira said, "The
     Prophet said, 'I saw Amr bin 'Amir bin Luhai
     Al-Khuzai dragging his intestines in the (Hell)
     Fire, for he was the first man who started the
     custom of releasing animals (for the sake of false
     gods).' " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 724: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When the news of the advent of the Prophet
     reached Abu Dhar, he said to his brother, "Ride
     to this valley and bring me the news of this man
     (i.e. the Prophet ) who claims to be a Prophet
     receiving information from the Heaven. Listen to
     him and then come to me." His brother set out till
     he met the Prophet and listened to his speech
     and returned to Abu Dhar and said to him, "I
     have seen him exhorting people to virtues and his
     speech was not like poetry." Abu Dhar said,
     "You have not satisfied me as to what I wanted."
     So, he took his journey-food and a water-skin
     full of water and set out till he reached Mecca,
     where he went to the Mosque looking for the
     Prophet , whom he did not know, and he would
     not like to ask someone about him. So, a portion
     of the night had passed when 'Ali saw him and
     realized that he was a stranger. Abu Dhar
     followed him (to his house), but neither of them
     asked the other about anything till it was morning,
     when he carried his water-skin and food and
     went to the Mosque. He spent that day without
     being observed by the Prophet till it was night,
     when he returned to his sleeping place. 'Ali again
     passed by him and said, "Hasn't the man (i.e.
     Abu Dhar) recognized his dwelling place yet?"
     So, 'Ali let him get up and took him (to his
     house), but neither of them asked the other about
     anything, till it was the third day when 'Ali had the
     same experience with him and Abu Dhar again
     stayed with him. 'Ali then asked, "Won't you tell
     me what has brought you here?" He replied, "If
     you give me a promise and a convention that you
     will guide me, then I will tell you." When 'Ali did,
     Abu Dhar informed him (of his purpose). 'Ali
     said, "It is the Truth, and he (i.e. Muhammad) is
     the Apostle of Allah. So when the morning
     comes, follow me, and if I should perceive any
     danger threatening you, I will give you a hint by
     pretending to go to the watercloset. But if I
     carried on walking, follow me till you enter the
     place that I will enter." Abu Dhur agreed and
     followed 'Ali till he entered the place of the
     Prophet and Abu Dhur entered with him. He then
     listened to the speech of the Prophet and
     embraced Islam on that very spot. The Prophet
     said to him, "Go back to your people and inform
     them (of this religion) till you receive my (further)
     orders." Abu Dhur said, "By Him in Whose
     Hands my life is! I will proclaim my conversion to
     Islam publicly amongst them (i.e. infidels)." He
     went out till he reached the Mosque and
     announced as loudly as possible, "I testify that
     None has the right to be worshipped but Allah
     and that Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah."
     The people then got up and beat him till they
     knocked him down. Al-Abbas came and threw
     himself over him (to protect him) saying, Woe to
     you! Don't you know that he is from Ghifar and
     there is the route (road) to your merchants
     towards Sham (i.e. through the place where this
     tribe dwells)?" Thus he saved him from them.
     Abu Dhar did the same on the next day and the
     people beat him again and Al-'Abbas drew
     himself over him (to save him as before). 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 725: 

     Narrated Abu Jamra: 

     Ibn 'Abbas said to us, "Shall I tell you the story
     of Abu Dhar's conversion to Islam?" We said,
     "Yes." He said, "Abu Dhar said: I was a man
     from the tribe of Ghifar. We heard that a man
     had appeared in Mecca, claiming to be a
     Prophet. ! said to my brother, 'Go to that man
     and talk to him and bring me his news.' He set
     out, met him and returned. I asked him, 'What is
     the news with you?' He said, 'By Allah, I saw a
     man enjoining what is good and forbidding what
     is evil.' I said to him, 'You have not satisfied me
     with this little information.' So, I took a waterskin
     and a stick and proceeded towards Mecca.
     Neither did I know him (i.e. the Prophet ), nor
     did I like to ask anyone about him. I Kept on
     drinking Zam zam water and staying in the
     Mosque. Then 'Ali passed by me and said, 'It
     seems you are a stranger?' I said, 'Yes.' He
     proceeded to his house and I accompanied him.
     Neither did he ask me anything, nor did I tell him
     anything. Next morning I went to the Mosque to
     ask about the Prophet but no-one told me
     anything about him. Ali passed by me again and
     asked, 'Hasn't the man recognized his dwelling
     place yet' I said, 'No.' He said, 'Come along with
     me.' He asked me, 'What is your business? What
     has brought you to this town?' I said to him, 'If
     you keep my secret, I will tell you.' He said, 'I
     will do,' I said to him, 'We have heard that a
     person has appeared here, claiming to be a
     Prophet. I sent my brother to speak to him and
     when he returned, he did not bring a satisfactory
     report; so I thought of meeting him personally.'
     'Ali said (to Abu Dhar), 'You have reached your
     goal; I am going to him just now, so follow me,
     and wherever I enter, enter after me. If I should
     see someone who may cause you trouble, I will
     stand near a wall pretending to mend my shoes
     (as a warning), and you should go away then.'
     'Ali proceeded and I accompanied him till he
     entered a place, and I entered with him to the
     Prophet to whom I said, 'Present (the principles
     of) Islam to me.' When he did, I embraced Islam
     'immediately. He said to me, 'O Abu Dhar! Keep
     your conversion as a secret and return to your
     town; and when you hear of our victory, return to
     us. ' I said, 'By H him Who has sent you with the
     Truth, I will announce my conversion to Islam
     publicly amongst them (i.e. the infidels),' Abu
     Dhar went to the Mosque, where some people
     from Quraish were present, and said, 'O folk of
     Quraish ! I testify that None has the right to be
     worshipped except Allah, and I (also) testify that
     Muhammad is Allah's Slave and His Apostle.'
     (Hearing that) the Quraishi men said, 'Get at this
     Sabi (i.e. Muslim) !' They got up and beat me
     nearly to death. Al 'Abbas saw me and threw
     himself over me to protect me. He then faced
     them and said, 'Woe to you! You want to kill a
     man from the tribe of Ghifar, although your trade
     and your communications are through the
     territory of Ghifar?' They therefore left me. The
     next morning I returned (to the Mosque) and said
     the same as I have said on the previous day.
     They again said, 'Get at this Sabi!' I was treated
     in the same way as on the previous day, and
     again Al-Abbas found me and threw himself over
     me to protect me and told them the same as he
     had said the day before.' So, that was the
     conversion of Abu Dhar (may Allah be Merciful
     to him) to Islam." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 726: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     If you wish to know about the ignorance of the
     Arabs, refer to Surat-al-Anam after Verse No.
     130:--Indeed lost are those who have killed their
     children From folly without knowledge and have
     forbidden that which Allah has provided for
     them, inventing a lie against Allah. They have
     indeed gone astray and were not guided.' (6.14) 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 727: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When the Verse:-- 'And warn your tribe of near
     kindred.' (26.214) was revealed, the Prophet
     started calling (the 'Arab tribes), "O Bani Fihr, O
     Bani 'Adi" mentioning first the various branch
     tribes of Quraish. 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: When the Verse:-- 'And
     warn your tribe of near kindred' (26.214). was
     revealed, the Prophet started calling every tribe
     by its name. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 728: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "O Bani 'Abd Munaf! Buy
     yourselves from Allah; O Bani 'Abdul-Muttalib!
     Buy yourselves from Allah; O mother of
     Az-Zubair bin Al-Awwam, the aunt of Allah's
     Apostle, and O Fatima bint Muhammad! Buy
     yourselves from Allah, for I cannot defend you
     before Allah. You (both) can ask me from my
     property as much as you like. " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 729: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet sent for the Ansar (and when they
     came), he asked, 'Is there any stranger amongst
     you?" They said, "No except the son of our
     sister." Allah's Apostle said, "The son of the
     sister of some people belongs to them." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 730: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     That during the Mina days, Abu Bakr came to
     her, while there where two girls with her, beating
     drums, and the Prophet was (lying) covering
     himself with his garment. Abu Bakr rebuked the
     two girls, but the Prophet uncovered his face and
     said, "O Abu Bakr! Leave them, for these are
     the days of Id (festival)." Those days were the
     days of Mina-. 'Aisha added, "I was being
     screened by the Prophet while I was watching
     the Ethiopians playing in the Mosque. 'Umar
     rebuked them, but the Prophet said, "Leave
     them, O Bani Arfida! Play. (for) you are safe." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 731: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Once Hassan bin Thabit asked the permission of
     the Prophet to lampoon (i.e. compose satirical
     poetry defaming) the infidels. The Prophet said,
     "What about the fact that I have common
     descent with them?" Hassan replied, "I shall take
     you out of them as a hair is taken out of dough." 

     Narrated 'Urwa: I started abusing Hassan in front
     of 'Aisha, whereupon she said. "Don't abuse him,
     for he used to defend the Prophet (with his
     poetry)." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 732: 

     Narrated Jubair bin Mutim: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "I have five names: I am
     Muhammad and Ahmad; I am Al-Mahi through
     whom Allah will eliminate infidelity; I am
     Al-Hashir who will be the first to be resurrected,
     the people being resurrected there after; and I
     am also Al-'Aqib (i.e. There will be no prophet
     after me)." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 733: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Doesn't it astonish you
     how Allah protects me from the Quraish's
     abusing and cursing? They abuse Mudhammam
     and curse Mudhammam while I am Muhammad
     (and not Mudhammam)" 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 734: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "My similitude in comparison
     with the other prophets is that of a man who has
     built a house completely and excellently except
     for a place of one brick. When the people enter
     the house, they admire its beauty and say: 'But
     for the place of this brick (how splendid the
     house will be)!" 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 735: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "My similitude in
     comparison with the other prophets before me, is
     that of a man who has built a house nicely and
     beautifully, except for a place of one brick in a
     corner. The people go about it and wonder at its
     beauty, but say: 'Would that this brick be put in
     its place!' So I am that brick, and I am the last of
     the Prophets." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 736: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet died when he was sixty three years
     old. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 737: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     While the Prophet was in the market, a man
     called (somebody), "O Abu-l-Qasim!' The
     Prophet turned to him and said "Name
     yourselves after me but do not call yourselves by
     my Kuniya." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 738: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet said, "Name yourselves after me,
     but do not call yourselves by my Kuniya." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 739: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Abu-l-Qasim said, "Name yourselves after me,
     but do not call yourselves by my Kuniya." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 740: 

     Narrated Al-Ju'aid bin 'Abdur Rahman: 

     I saw As-Sa'ib bin Yazid when he was
     ninety-four years old, quite strong and of straight
     figure. He said, "I know that I enjoyed my
     hearing and seeing powers only because of the
     invocation of Allah's Apostle . My aunt took me
     to him and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! My nephew
     is sick; will you invoke Allah for him?' So he
     invoked (Allah) for me." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 741: 

     Narrated As- Scab bin Yazid: 

     My aunt took me to Allah's Apostle and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! My nephew is sick"' The
     Prophet passed his hands over my head and
     blessed me. Then he performed ablution and I
     drank the remaining water, and standing behind
     him. A saw the seal in between his shoulders." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 742: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith: 

     (Once) Abu Bakr offered the 'Asr prayer and
     then went out walking and saw Al-Hasan playing
     with the boys. He lifted him on to his shoulders
     and said, " Let my parents be sacrificed for your
     sake! (You) resemble the Prophet and not 'Ali,"
     while 'Ali was smiling. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 743: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     I saw the Prophet, and Al-Hasan resembled him.


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 744: 

     Narrated Isma'il bin Abi Khalid: 

     I heard Abii Juhaifa saying, "I saw the Prophet,
     and Al-Hasan bin 'Ali resembled him." I said to
     Abu- Juhaifa, "Describe him for me." He said,
     "He was white and his beard was black with
     some white hair. He promised to give us 13
     young she-camels, but he expired before we
     could get them." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 745: 

     Narrated Wahb Abu Juhaifa As-Sawwai: 

     I saw the Prophet and saw some white hair
     below his lower lip above the chin. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 746: 

     Narrated Hariz bin 'Uthman: 

     That he asked 'Abdullah bin Busr (i.e. the
     companion of the Prophet), "Did you see the
     Prophet when he was old?" He said, "He had a
     few white hairs between the lower lip and the
     chin." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 747: 

     Narrated Rabia bin Abi Abdur-Rahman: 

     I heard Anas bin Malik describing the Prophet
     saying, "He was of medium height amongst the
     people, neither tall nor short; he had a rosy color,
     neither absolutely white nor deep brown; his hair
     was neither completely curly nor quite lank.
     Divine Inspiration was revealed to him when he
     was forty years old. He stayed ten years in
     Mecca receiving the Divine Inspiration, and
     stayed in Medina for ten more years. When he
     expired, he had scarcely twenty white hairs in his
     head and beard." Rabi'a said, "I saw some of his
     hairs and it was red. When I asked about that, I
     was told that it turned red because of scent. " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 748: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle was neither very tall nor short,
     neither absolutely white nor deep brown. His hair
     was neither curly nor lank. Allah sent him (as an
     Apostle) when he was forty years old.
     Afterwards he resided in Mecca for ten years
     and in Medina for ten more years. When Allah
     took him unto Him, there was scarcely twenty
     white hairs in his head and beard. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 749: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     Allah's Apostle was the handsomest of all the
     people, and had the best appearance. He was
     neither very tall nor short. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 750: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     I asked Anas, "Did the Prophet use to dye (his)
     hair?" He said, "No, for there were only a few
     white hairs on his temples." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 751: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The Prophet was of moderate height having
     broad shoulders (long) hair reaching his
     ear-lobes. Once I saw him in a red cloak and I
     had never seen a more handsome than him." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 752: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     Al-Bara' was asked, "Was the face of the
     Prophet (as bright) as a sword?" He said, "No,
     but (as bright) as a moon." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 753: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     Once Allah's Apostle went to Al-Batha' at noon,
     performed the ablution and offered' a two Rakat
     Zuhr prayer and a two-Rak'at 'Asr prayer while
     a spearheaded stick was planted before him and
     the passersby were passing in front of it. (After
     the prayer), the people got up and held the hands
     of the Prophet and passed them on their faces. I
     also took his hand and kept it on my face and
     noticed that it was colder than ice, and its smell
     was nicer than musk. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 754: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet was the most generous of all the
     people, and he used to become more generous in
     Ramadan when Gabriel met him. Gabriel used to
     meet him every night during Ramadan to revise
     the Qur'an with him. Allah's Apostle then used to
     be more generous than the fast wind. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 755: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     That Allah's Apostle came to her in a happy
     mood with his features glittering with joy, and
     said, "Have you not heard what the Qaif has said
     about Zaid and Us-ama? He saw their feet and
     remarked. These belong to each other." (i.e.
     They are father and son.) 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 756: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ka'b: 

     I heard Ka'b bin Malik talking after his failure to
     join (the Ghazwa of) Tabuk. He said, "When I
     greeted Allah's Apostle whose face was glittering
     with happiness, for whenever Allah's Apostle
     was happy, his face used to glitter, as if it was a
     piece of the moon, and we used to recognize it
     (i.e. his happiness) from his face." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 757: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "I have been sent (as an
     Apostle) in the best of all the generations of
     Adam's offspring since their Creation." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 758: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle used to let his hair hang down
     while the infidels used to part their hair. The
     people of the Scriptures were used to letting their
     hair hang down and Allah's Apostle liked to
     follow the people of the Scriptures in the matters
     about which he was not instructed otherwise.
     Then Allah's Apostle parted his hair. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 759: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     The Prophet never used bad language neither a
     "Fahish nor a Mutafahish. He used to say "The
     best amongst you are those who have the best
     manners and character." (See Hadith No. 56 (B)
     Vol. 8) 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 760: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle was given the choice
     of one of two matters, he would choose the
     easier of the two, as long as it was not sinful to
     do so, but if it was sinful to do so, he would not
     approach it. Allah's Apostle never took revenge
     (over anybody) for his own sake but (he did)
     only when Allah's Legal Bindings were outraged
     in which case he would take revenge for Allah's
     Sake. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 761: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I have never touched silk or Dibaj (i.e. thick silk)
     softer than the palm of the Prophet nor have I
     smelt a perfume nicer than the sweat of the
     Prophet 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 762: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet was shier than a veined virgin girl. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 763: 

     Narrated Shuba: 

     A similar Hadith (i e. No. 762) with this addition:
     And if he (i.e. the Prophet) disliked something,
     the sign of aversion would appear on his face. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 764: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet never criticized any food (presented
     him), but he would eat it if he liked it; otherwise,
     he would leave it (without expressing his dislike). 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 765: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Malik bin Buhaina
     Al-Asdi: 

     When the Prophet prostrated, he used to keep
     his arms so widely apart that we used to see his
     armpits. (The sub-narrator, Ibn Bukair said, "The
     whiteness of his armpits.") 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 766: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle did not use to raise his hands in
     his invocations except in the Istisqa (i.e. invoking
     Allah for the rain) in which he used to raise his
     hands so high that one could see the whiteness of
     his armpits. (Note: It may be that Anas did not
     see the prophet (as) raising his hands but it has
     been narrated that the Prophet (as) used to raise
     his hands for invocations other than Istisqa. See
     Hadith No. 612 Vol. 5. and Hadith No. 807 &
     808 Vol 2.) 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 767: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     By chance I went to the Prophet at noon while
     he was at Al-Abtah (resting) in a tent. Bilal came
     out (of the tent) and pronounced the Adhan for
     the prayer, and entering again, he brought out the
     water which was left after Allah's Apostle had
     performed the ablution. The people rushed to
     take some of the water. Bilal again went in and
     brought out a spear-headed stick, and then
     Allah's Apostle came out. As if I were now
     looking at the whiteness of his leg. Bilal fixed the
     stick and the Prophet offered a two-Rakat Zuhr
     prayer and a two-Rak'at 'Asr prayer, while
     women and donkeys were passing in front of the
     Prophet (beyond the stick) . 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 768: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to talk so clearly that if
     somebody wanted to count the number of his
     words, he could do so. Narrated Urwa bin
     Az-Zubair: 'Aisha said (to me), "Don't you
     wonder at Abu so-and-so who came and sat by
     my dwelling and started relating the traditions of
     Allah's Apostle intending to let me hear that,
     while I was performing an optional prayer. He
     left before I finished my optional prayer. Had I
     found him still there. I would have said to him,
     'Allah's Apostle never talked so quickly and
     vaguely as you do.' " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 769: 

     Narrated Abu Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman: 

     That he asked 'Aisha "How was the prayer of
     Allah's Apostle in the month of Ramadan?" She
     replied, "He used not to pray more than eleven
     Rakat whether in Ramadan or in any other
     month. He used to offer four Rakat, let alone
     their beauty and length, and then four Rakat, let
     alone their beauty and length. Afterwards he
     would offer three Rakat. I said, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! Do you go to bed before offering the
     Witr prayer?' He said, 'My eyes sleep, but my
     heart does not sleep."' 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 770: 

     Narrated Sharik bin 'Abdullah bin Abi Namr: 

     I heard Anas bin Malik telling us about the night
     when the Prophet was made to travel from the
     Ka'ba Mosque. Three persons (i.e. angels) came
     to the Prophet before he was divinely inspired
     was an Aspostle), while he was sleeping in Al
     Masjid-ul-Haram. The first (of the three angels)
     said, "Which of them is he?" The second said,
     "He is the best of them." That was all that
     happened then, and he did not see them till they
     came at another night and he perceived their
     presence with his heart, for the eyes of the
     Prophet were closed when he was asleep, but his
     heart was not asleep (not unconscious). This is
     characteristic of all the prophets: Their eyes sleep
     but their hearts do not sleep. Then Gabriel took
     charge of the Prophet and ascended along with
     him to the Heaven. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 771: 

     Narrated Imran bin Husain: 

     That they were with the Prophet on a journey.
     They travelled the whole night, and when dawn
     approached, they took a rest and sleep
     overwhelmed them till the sun rose high in the
     sky. The first to get up was Abu Bakr. Allah's
     Apostles used not to be awakened from his
     sleep, but he would wake up by himself. 'Umar
     woke up and then Abu Bakr sat by the side of
     the Prophet's head and started saying:
     Allahu-Akbar raising his voice till the Prophet
     woke up, (and after traveling for a while) he
     dismounted and led us in the morning prayer. A
     man amongst the people failed to join us in the
     prayer. When the Prophet had finished the
     prayer, he asked (the man), "O so-and-so! What
     prevented you from offering the prayer with us?"
     He replied, "I am Junub," Alllah's Apostle
     ordered him to perform Tayammam with clean
     earth. The man then offered the prayer. Allah's
     Apostle ordered me and a few others to go
     ahead of him. We had become very thirsty.
     While we were on our way (looking for water),
     we came across a lady (riding an animal),
     hanging her legs between two water-skins. We
     asked her, "Where can we get water?" She
     replied, "Oh ! There is no water." We asked,
     "how far is your house from the water?" She
     replied, "A distance of a day and a night travel."
     We said, "Come on to Allah's Apostle, "She
     asked, "What is Allah's Apostle ?" So we
     brought her to Allah's Apostle against her will,
     and she told him what she had told us before and
     added that she was the mother of orphans. So
     the Prophet ordered that her two water-skins be
     brought and he rubbed the mouths of the
     water-skins. As we were thirsty, we drank till we
     quenched our thirst and we were forty men. We
     also filled all our waterskins and other utensils
     with water, but we did not water the camels. The
     waterskin was so full that it was almost about to
     burst. The Prophet then said, "Bring what
     (foodstuff) you have." So some dates and pieces
     of bread were collected for the lady, and when
     she went to her people, she said, "I have met
     either the greatest magician or a prophet as the
     people claim." So Allah guided the people of that
     village through that lady. She embraced Islam
     and they all embraced Islam. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 772: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     A bowl of water was brought to the Prophet
     while he was at Az-Zawra. He placed his hand in
     it and the water started flowing among his fingers.
     All the people performed ablution (with that
     water). Qatada asked Anas, "How many people
     were you?" Anas replied, "Three hundred or
     nearly three-hundred." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 773: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle at the 'time when the Asr
     prayer was due. Then the people were searching
     for water for ablution but they could not find any.
     Then some water was brought to Allah's Apostle
     and he placed his hand in the pot and ordered
     the people to perform the ablution with the
     water. I saw water flowing from underneath his
     fingers and the people started performing the
     ablution till all of them did it. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 774: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet went out on one of his journeys with
     some of his companions. They went on walking
     till the time of the prayer became due. They
     could not find water to perform the ablution. One
     of them went away and brought a little amount of
     water in a pot. The Prophet took it and
     performed the ablution, and then stretched his
     four fingers on to the pot and said (to the
     people), "Get up to perform the ablution." They
     started performing the ablution till all of them did
     it, and they were seventy or so persons. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 775: 

     Narrated Humaid: 

     Anas bin Malik said, "Once the time of the
     prayer became due and the people whose
     houses were close to the Mosque went to their
     houses to perform ablution, while the others
     remained (sitting there). A stone pot containing
     water was brought to the Prophet, who wanted
     to put his hand in it, but It was too small for him
     to spread his hand in it, and so he had to bring
     his fingers together before putting his hand in the
     pot. Then all the people performed the ablution
     (with that water)." I asked Anas, "How many
     persons were they." He replied, "There were
     eighty men." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 776: 

     Narrated Salim bin Abi Aj-Jad: 

     Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, "The people became
     very thirsty on the day of Al-Hudaibiya (Treaty).
     A small pot containing some water was in front
     of the Prophet and when he had finished the
     ablution, the people rushed towards him. He
     asked, 'What is wrong with you?' They replied,
     'We have no water either for performing ablution
     or for drinking except what is present in front of
     you.' So he placed his hand in that pot and the
     water started flowing among his fingers like
     springs. We all drank and performed ablution
     (from it)." I asked Jabir, "How many were you?"
     he replied, "Even if we had been
     one-hundred-thousand, it would have been
     sufficient for us, but we were fifteen-hundred." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 777: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     We were one-thousand-and-four-hundred
     persons on the day of Al-Hudaibiya (Treaty),
     and (at) Al-Hudaibiya (there) was a well. We
     drew out its water not leaving even a single drop.
     The Prophet sat at the edge of the well and
     asked for some water with which he rinsed his
     mouth and then he threw it out into the well. We
     stayed for a short while and then drew water
     from the well and quenched our thirst, and even
     our riding animals drank water to their
     satisfaction. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 778: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Abu Talha said to Um Sulaim, "I have noticed
     feebleness in the voice of Allah's Apostle which I
     think, is caused by hunger. Have you got any
     food?" She said, "Yes." She brought out some
     loaves of barley and took out a veil belonging to
     her, and wrapped the bread in part of it and put
     it under my arm and wrapped part of the veil
     round me and sent me to Allah's Apostle. I went
     carrying it and found Allah's Apostle in the
     Mosque sitting with some people. When I stood
     there, Allah's Apostle asked, "Has Abu Talha
     sent you?" I said, "Yes". He asked, "With some
     food? I said, "Yes" Allah's Apostle then said to
     the men around him, "Get up!" He set out
     (accompanied by them) and I went ahead of
     them till I reached Abu Talha and told him (of the
     Prophet's visit). Abu Talha said, "O Um Sulaim!
     Allah's Apostle is coming with the people and we
     have no food to feed them." She said, "Allah and
     His Apostle know better." So Abu Talha went
     out to receive Allah's Apostle. Allah's Apostle
     came along with Abu Talha. Allah's Apostle said,
     "O Um Sulaim! Bring whatever you have." She
     brought the bread which Allah's Apostle ordered
     to be broken into pieces. Um Sulaim poured on
     them some butter from an oilskin. Then Allah's
     Apostle recited what Allah wished him to recite,
     and then said, "Let ten persons come (to share
     the meal)." Ten persons were admitted, ate their
     fill and went out. Then he again said, "Let another
     ten do the same." They were admitted, ate their
     fill and went out. Then he again said, '"'Let
     another ten persons (do the same.)" They were
     admitted, ate their fill and went out. Then he said,
     "Let another ten persons come." In short, all of
     them ate their fill, and they were seventy or eighty
     men. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 779: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     We used to consider miracles as Allah's
     Blessings, but you people consider them to be a
     warning. Once we were with Allah's Apostle on
     a journey, and we ran short of water. He said,
     "Bring the water remaining with you." The people
     brought a utensil containing a little water. He
     placed his hand in it and said, "Come to the
     blessed water, and the Blessing is from Allah." I
     saw the water flowing from among the fingers of
     Allah's Apostle , and no doubt, we heard the
     meal glorifying Allah, when it was being eaten (by
     him). 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 780: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     My father had died in debt. So I came to the
     Prophet and said, "My father (died) leaving
     unpaid debts, and I have nothing except the yield
     of his date palms; and their yield for many years
     will not cover his debts. So please come with
     me, so that the creditors may not misbehave with
     me." The Prophet went round one of the heaps
     of dates and invoked (Allah), and then did the
     same with another heap and sat on it and said,
     "Measure (for them)." He paid them their rights
     and what remained was as much as had been
     paid to them. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 781: 

     Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr: 

     The companions of Suffa were poor people. The
     Prophet once said, "Whoever has food enough
     for two persons, should take a third one (from
     among them), and whoever has food enough for
     four persons, should take a fifth or a sixth (or
     said something similar)." Abu Bakr brought three
     persons while the Prophet took ten. And Abu
     Bakr with his three family member (who were I,
     my father and my mother) (the sub-narrator is in
     doubt whether 'Abdur-Rahman said, "My wife
     and my servant who was common for both my
     house and Abu Bakr's house.") Abu Bakr took
     his supper with the Prophet and stayed there till
     he offered the 'Isha' prayers. He returned and
     stayed till Allah's Apostle took his supper. After
     a part of the night had passed, he returned to his
     house. His wife said to him, "What has detained
     you from your guests?" He said, "Have you
     served supper to them?" She said, "They refused
     to take supper) until you come. They (i.e. some
     members of the household) presented the meal to
     them but they refused (to eat)" I went to hide
     myself and he said, "O Ghunthar!" He invoked
     Allah to cause my ears to be cut and he rebuked
     me. He then said (to them): Please eat!" and
     added, I will never eat the meal." By Allah,
     whenever we took a handful of the meal, the
     meal grew from underneath more than that
     handful till everybody ate to his satisfaction; yet
     the remaining food was more than the original
     meal. Abu Bakr saw that the food was as much
     or more than the original amount. He called his
     wife, "O sister of Bani Firas!" She said, "O
     pleasure of my eyes. The food has been tripled in
     quantity." Abu Bakr then started eating thereof
     and said, "It (i.e. my oath not to eat) was
     because of Sa all." He took a handful from it, and
     carried the rest to the Prophet. SO that food was
     with the Prophet . There was a treaty between us
     and some people, and when the period of that
     treaty had elapsed, he divided US into twelve
     groups, each being headed by a man. Allah
     knows how many men were under the command
     of each leader. Anyhow, the Prophet surely sent
     a leader with each group. Then all of them ate of
     that meal. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 782: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Once during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle, the
     people of Medina suffered from drought. So
     while the Prophet was delivering a sermon on a
     Friday a man got up saying, "O Allah's Apostle!
     The horses and sheep have perished. Will you
     invoke Allah to bless us with rain?" The Prophet
     lifted both his hands and invoked. The sky at that
     time was as clear as glass. Suddenly a wind
     blew, raising clouds that gathered together, and it
     started raining heavily. We came out (of the
     Mosque) wading through the flowing water till
     we reached our homes. It went on raining till the
     next Friday, when the same man or some other
     man stood up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The
     houses have collapsed; please invoke Allah to
     withhold the rain." On that the Prophet smiled
     and said, "O Allah, (let it rain) around us and not
     on us." I then looked at the clouds to see them
     separating forming a sort of a crown round
     Medina. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 783: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet used to deliver his sermons while
     standing beside a trunk of a datepalm. When he
     had the pulpit made, he used it instead. The trunk
     started crying and the Prophet went to it, rubbing
     his hand over it (to stop its crying). 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 784: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet used to stand by a tree or a
     date-palm on Friday. Then an Ansari woman or
     man said. "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we make a
     pulpit for you?" He replied, "If you wish." So
     they made a pulpit for him and when it was
     Friday, he proceeded towards the pulpit (for
     delivering the sermon). The date-palm cried like
     a child! The Prophet descended (the pulpit) and
     embraced it while it continued moaning like a
     child being quietened. The Prophet said, "It was
     crying for (missing) what it used to hear of
     religious knowledge given near to it." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 785: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     That he heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, "The
     roof of the Mosque was built over trunks of
     date-palms working as pillars. When the Prophet
     delivered a sermon, he used to stand by one of
     those trunks till the pulpit was made for him, and
     he used it instead. Then we heard the trunk
     sending a sound like of a pregnant she-camel till
     the Prophet came to it, and put his hand over it,
     then it became quiet." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 786: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     Once 'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, said, "Who
     amongst you remembers the statement of Allah's
     Apostle regarding the afflictions?" Hudhaifa
     replied, "I remember what he said exactly."
     'Umar said. "Tell (us), you are really a daring
     man!'' Hudhaifa said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'A
     man's afflictions (i.e. wrong deeds) concerning
     his relation to his family, his property and his
     neighbors are expiated by his prayers, giving in
     charity and enjoining what is good and forbidding
     what is evil.' " 'Umar said, "I don't mean these
     afflictions but the afflictions that will be heaving
     up and down like waves of the sea." Hudhaifa
     replied, "O chief of the believers! You need not
     fear those (afflictions) as there is a closed door
     between you and them." 'Umar asked, "Will that
     door be opened or broken?" Hudhaifa replied,
     "No, it will be broken." 'Umar said, "Then it is
     very likely that the door will not be closed again."
     Later on the people asked Hudhaifa, "Did 'Umar
     know what that door meant?" He said. "Yes,
     'Umar knew it as everyone knows that there will
     be night before the tomorrow morning. I narrated
     to 'Umar an authentic narration, not lies." We
     dared not ask Hudhaifa; therefore we requested
     Masruq who asked him, "What does the door
     stand for?" He said, "Umar." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 787: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The Hour will not be
     established till you fight a nation wearing hairy
     shoes, and till you fight the Turks, who will have
     small eyes, red faces and flat noses; and their
     faces will be like flat shields. And you will find
     that the best people are those who hate
     responsibility of ruling most of all till they are
     chosen to be the rulers. And the people are of
     different natures: The best in the pre-lslamic
     period are the best in Islam. A time will come
     when any of you will love to see me rather than
     to have his family and property doubled." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 788: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The Hour will not be
     established till you fight with the Khudh and the
     Kirman from among the non-Arabs. They will be
     of red faces, flat noses and small eyes; their faces
     will look like flat shields, and their shoes will be
     of hair." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 789: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I enjoyed the company of Allah's Apostle for
     three years, and during the other years of my life,
     never was I so anxious to understand the
     (Prophet's) traditions as I was during those three
     years. I heard him saying, beckoning with his
     hand in this way, "Before the Hour you will fight
     with people who will have hairy shoes and live in
     Al-Bariz." (Sufyan, the sub-narrator once said,
     "And they are the people of Al-Bazir.") 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 790: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Taghlib: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Near the Hour
     you will fight with people who will wear hairy
     shoes; and you will also fight people with flat
     faces like shields." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 791: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The Jews will
     fight with you, and you will be given victory over
     them so that a stone will say, 'O Muslim! There is
     a Jew behind me; kill him!' " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 792: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet said, "A time will come when the
     people will wage holy war, and it will be asked,
     'Is there any amongst you who has enjoyed the
     company of Allah's Apostle?' They will say:
     'Yes.' And then victory will be bestowed upon
     them. They will wage holy war again, and it will
     be asked: 'Is there any among you who has
     enjoyed the company of the companions of
     Allah's Apostle ?' They will say: 'Yes.' And then
     victory will be bestowed on them." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 793: 

     Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim: 

     While I was in the city of the Prophet, a man
     came and complained to him (the Prophet, ) of
     destitution and poverty. Then another man came
     and complained of robbery (by highwaymen).
     The Prophet said, "Adi! Have you been to
     Al-Hira?" I said, "I haven't been to it, but I was
     informed about it." He said, "If you should live
     for a long time, you will certainly see that a lady
     in a Howdah traveling from Al-Hira will (safely
     reach Mecca and) perform the Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba, fearing none but Allah." I said to myself,
     "What will happen to the robbers of the tribe of
     Tai who have spread evil through out the
     country?" The Prophet further said. "If you
     should live long, the treasures of Khosrau will be
     opened (and taken as spoils)." I asked, "You
     mean Khosrau, son of Hurmuz?" He said,
     "Khosrau, son of Hurmuz; and if you should live
     long, you will see that one will carry a handful of
     gold or silver and go out looking for a person to
     accept it from him, but will find none to accept it
     from him. And any of you, when meeting Allah,
     will meet Him without needing an interpreter
     between him and Allah to interpret for him, and
     Allah will say to him: 'Didn't I send a messenger
     to teach you?' He will say: 'Yes.' Allah will say:
     'Didn't I give you wealth and do you favors?' He
     will say: 'Yes.' Then he will look to his right and
     see nothing but Hell, and look to his left and see
     nothing but Hell." 

     'Adi further said: I heard the Prophet saying,
     "Save yourself from the (Hell) Fire even with half
     a date (to be given in charity) and if you do not
     find a half date, then with a good pleasant word."
     'Adi added: (later on) I saw a lady in a Howdah
     traveling from Al-Hira till she performed the
     Tawaf of the Ka'ba, fearing none but Allah. And
     I was one of those who opened (conquered) the
     treasures of Khosrau, son of Hurmuz. If you
     should live long, you will see what the Prophet
     Abu-l-Qasim had said: 'A person will come out
     with a handful. of gold...etc. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 794: 

     Narrated 'Adi: 

     as above (i.e. Hadith No. 793). 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 795: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amr: 

     The Prophet once came out and offered the
     funeral prayer for the martyrs of Uhud, and
     proceeded to the pulpit and said, "I shall be your
     predecessor and a witness on you, and I am
     really looking at my sacred Fount now, and no
     doubt, I have been given the keys of the
     treasures of the world. By Allah, I am not afraid
     that you will worship others along with Allah, but
     I am afraid that you will envy and fight one
     another for worldly fortunes." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 796: 

     Narrated Usama: 

     Once the Prophet stood on one of the high
     buildings (of Medina) and said, "Do you see
     what I see? I see affliction pouring among your
     hours like raindrops." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 797: 

     Narrated Zainab bint Jahsh: 

     That the Prophet came to her in a state of fear
     saying, "None has the right to be worshiped but
     Allah! Woe to the Arabs because of evil that has
     come near. Today a hole has been made in the
     wall of Gog and Magog as large as this." pointing
     with two of his fingers making a circle. Zainab
     said, "I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Shall we be
     destroyed though amongst us there are pious
     people? ' He said, 'Yes, if evil increases." 

     Narrated Um Salama: The Prophet woke up and
     said, "Glorified be Allah: What great (how many)
     treasures have been sent down, and what great
     (how many ) afflictions have been sent down!" 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 798: 

     Narrated Sasaa: 

     Abu Said Al-Khudr said to me, "I notice that you
     like sheep and you keep them; so take care of
     them and their food, for I have heard Allah's
     Apostle saying, 'A time will come upon the
     people when the best of a Muslim's property will
     be sheep, which he will take to the tops of
     mountains and to the places of rain-falls to run
     away with his religion in order to save it from
     afflictions.' " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 799: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There will be afflictions
     (and at the time) the sitting person will be better
     than the standing one, and the standing one will
     be better than the walking, and the walking will
     be better than the running. And whoever will
     look towards those afflictions, they will overtake
     him, and whoever will find a refuge or a shelter,
     should take refuge in it." The same narration is
     reported by Abu Bakr, with the addition, "(The
     Prophet said), 'Among the prayers there is a
     prayer the missing of which will be to one like
     losing one's family and property." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 800: 

     Narrated Ibn Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet said, "Soon others will be preferred
     to you, and there will be things which you will not
     like." The companions of the Prophet asked, "O
     Allah's Apostle! What do you order us to do (in
     this case)? " He said, "(I order you) to give the
     rights that are on you and to ask your rights from
     Allah." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 801: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "This branch from Quraish
     will ruin the people." The companions of the
     Prophet asked, "What do you order us to do
     (then)?" He said, "I would suggest that the
     people keep away from them.'' 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 802: 

     Narrated Said Al-Umawi: 

     I was with Marwan and Abu Huraira and heard
     Abu Huraira saying, "I heard the trustworthy,
     truly inspired one (i.e. the Prophet ) saying, 'The
     destruction of my followers will be brought about
     by the hands of some youngsters from Quraish."
     Marwan asked, "Youngsters?" Abu Huraira said,
     "If you wish, I would name them: They are the
     children of so-and-so and the children of
     so-and-so." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 803: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa bin Al-Yaman: 

     The people used to ask Allah's Apostle about
     good, but I used to ask him about evil for fear
     that it might overtake me. Once I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! We were in ignorance and in evil and
     Allah has bestowed upon us the present good;
     will there by any evil after this good?" He said,
     "Yes." I asked, "Will there be good after that
     evil?" He said, "Yes, but it would be tained with
     Dakhan (i.e. Little evil)." I asked, "What will its
     Dakhan be?" He said, "There will be some
     people who will lead (people) according to
     principles other than my tradition. You will see
     their actions and disapprove of them." I said,
     "Will there by any evil after that good?" He said,
     "Yes, there will be some people who will invite
     others to the doors of Hell, and whoever accepts
     their invitation to it will be thrown in it (by them)."
     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Describe those
     people to us." He said, "They will belong to us
     and speak our language" I asked, "What do you
     order me to do if such a thing should take place
     in my life?" He said, "Adhere to the group of
     Muslims and their Chief." I asked, "If there is
     neither a group (of Muslims) nor a chief (what
     shall I do)?" He said, "Keep away from all those
     different sects, even if you had to bite (i.e. eat)
     the root of a tree, till you meet Allah while you
     are still in that state." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 804: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     My companions learned (something about) good
     (through asking the Prophet while I learned
     (something about) evil. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 805: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The Day of (Judgment) will
     not be established till there is a war between two
     groups whose claims (or religion) will be the
     same." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 806: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The Hour will not be
     established till there is a war between two groups
     among whom there will be a great number of
     casualties, though the claims (or religion) of both
     of them will be one and the same. And the Hour
     will not be established till there appear about
     thirty liars, all of whom will be claiming to be the
     messengers of Allah. " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 807: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     While we were with Allah's Apostle who was
     distributing (i.e. some property), there came
     Dhu-l-Khuwaisira, a man from the tribe of Bani
     Tamim and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Do Justice."
     The Prophet said, "Woe to you! Who could do
     justice if I did not? I would be a desperate loser
     if I did not do justice." 'Umar said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Allow me to chop his head off." The
     Prophet said, "Leave him, for he has companions
     who pray and fast in such a way that you will
     consider your fasting negligible in comparison to
     theirs. They recite Qur'an but it does not go
     beyond their throats (i.e. they do not act on it)
     and they will desert Islam as an arrow goes
     through a victim's body, so that the hunter, on
     looking at the arrow's blade, would see nothing
     on it; he would look at its Risaf and see nothing:
     he would look at its Na,di and see nothing, and
     he would look at its Qudhadh ( 1 ) and see
     nothing (neither meat nor blood), for the arrow
     has been too fast even for the blood and
     excretions to smear. The sign by which they will
     be recognized is that among them there will be a
     black man, one of whose arms will resemble a
     woman's breast or a lump of meat moving
     loosely. Those people will appear when there will
     be differences amongst the people." I testify that
     I heard this narration from Allah's Apostle and I
     testify that 'Ali bin Abi Talib fought with such
     people, and I was in his company. He ordered
     that the man (described by the Prophet ) should
     be looked for. The man was brought and I
     looked at him and noticed that he looked exactly
     as the Prophet had described him. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 808: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     I relate the traditions of Allah's Apostle to you
     for I would rather fall from the sky than attribute
     something to him falsely. But when I tell you a
     thing which is between you and me, then no
     doubt, war is guile. I heard Allah's Apostle
     saying, "In the last days of this world there will
     appear some young foolish people who will use
     (in their claim) the best speech of all people (i.e.
     the Qur'an) and they will abandon Islam as an
     arrow going through the game. Their belief will
     not go beyond their throats (i.e. they will have
     practically no belief), so wherever you meet
     them, kill them, for he who kills them shall get a
     reward on the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 809: 

     Narrated Khabbab bin Al-Arat: 

     We complained to Allah's Apostle (of the
     persecution inflicted on us by the infidels) while
     he was sitting in the shade of the Ka'ba, leaning
     over his Burd (i.e. covering sheet). We said to
     him, "Would you seek help for us? Would you
     pray to Allah for us?" He said, "Among the
     nations before you a (believing) man would be
     put in a ditch that was dug for him, and a saw
     would be put over his head and he would be cut
     into two pieces; yet that (torture) would not
     make him give up his religion. His body would be
     combed with iron combs that would remove his
     flesh from the bones and nerves, yet that would
     not make him abandon his religion. By Allah, this
     religion (i.e. Islam) will prevail till a traveler from
     Sana (in Yemen) to Hadrarmaut will fear none
     but Allah, or a wolf as regards his sheep, but you
     (people) are hasty. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 810: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet noticed the absence of Thabit bin
     Qais. A man said, "O Allah's Apostle! I shall
     bring you his news." So he went to him and saw
     him sitting in his house drooping his head (sadly).
     He asked Thabit, "What's the matter?" Thabit
     replied, "An evil situation: A man used to raise his
     voice over the voice of the Prophet and so all his
     good deeds have been annulled and he is from
     the people of Hell." The man went back and told
     the Prophet that Thabit had said so-and-so. (The
     sub-narrator, Musa bin Anas said, "The man
     went to Thabit again with glad tidings)." The
     Prophet said to him, "Go and say to Thabit: 'You
     are not from the people of Fire, but from the
     people of Paradise." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 811: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     A man recited Surat-al-Kahf (in his prayer) and
     in the house there was a (riding) animal which got
     frightened and started jumping. The man finished
     his prayer with Taslim, but behold! A mist or a
     cloud hovered over him. He informed the
     Prophet of that and the Prophet said, "O
     so-and-so! Recite, for this (mist or cloud) was a
     sign of peace descending for the recitation of
     Quran." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 812: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     Abu Bakr came to my father who was at home
     and purchased a saddle from him. He said to
     'Azib. "Tell your son to carry it with me." So I
     carried it with him and my father followed us so
     as to take the price (of the saddle). My father
     said, "O Abu Bakr! Tell me what happened to
     you on your night journey with Allah's Apostle
     (during Migration)." He said, "Yes, we travelled
     the whole night and also the next day till midday.
     when nobody could be seen on the way (
     because of the severe heat) . Then there
     appeared a long rock having shade beneath it,
     and the sunshine had not come to it yet. So we
     dismounted there and I levelled a place and
     covered it with an animal hide or dry grass for
     the Prophet to sleep on (for a while). I then said,
     'Sleep, O Allah's Apostle, and I will guard you.'
     So he slept and I went out to guard him.
     Suddenly I saw a shepherd coming with his
     sheep to that rock with the same intention we
     had when we came to it. I asked (him). 'To
     whom do you belong, O boy?' He replied, 'I
     belong to a man from Medina or Mecca.' I said,
     'Do your sheep have milk?' He said, 'Yes.' I said,
     'Will you milk for us?' He said, 'Yes.' He caught
     hold of a sheep and I asked him to clean its teat
     from dust, hairs and dirt. (The sub-narrator said
     that he saw Al-Bara' striking one of his hands
     with the other, demonstrating how the shepherd
     removed the dust.) The shepherd milked a little
     milk in a wooden container and I had a leather
     container which I carried for the Prophet to drink
     and perform the ablution from. I went to the
     Prophet, hating to wake him up, but when I
     reached there, the Prophet had already
     awakened; so I poured water over the middle
     part of the milk container, till the milk was cold.
     Then I said, 'Drink, O Allah's Apostle!' He drank
     till I was pleased. Then he asked, 'Has the time
     for our departure come?' I said, 'Yes.' So we
     departed after midday. Suraqa bin Malik
     followed us and I said, 'We have been
     discovered, O Allah's Apostle!' He said, Don't
     grieve for Allah is with us.' The Prophet invoked
     evil on him (i.e. Suraqa) and so the legs of his
     horse sank into the earth up to its belly. (The
     subnarrator, Zuhair is not sure whether Abu Bakr
     said, "(It sank) into solid earth.") Suraqa said, 'I
     see that you have invoked evil on me. Please
     invoke good on me, and by Allah, I will cause
     those who are seeking after you to return.' The
     Prophet invoked good on him and he was saved.
     Then, whenever he met somebody on the way,
     he would say, 'I have looked for him here in
     vain.' So he caused whomever he met to return.
     Thus Suraqa fulfilled his promise." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 813: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet paid a visit to a sick bedouin. The
     Prophet when visiting a patient used to say, "No
     harm will befall you! May Allah cure you! May
     Allah cure you!" So the Prophet said to the
     bedouin. "No harm will befall you. May Allah
     cure you!" The bedouin said, "You say, may
     Allah cure me? No, for it is a fever which boils in
     (the body of) an old man, and will lead him to the
     grave." The Prophet said, "Yes, then may it be as
     you say." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 814: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     There was a Christian who embraced Islam and
     read Surat-al-Baqara and Al-Imran, and he used
     to write (the revelations) for the Prophet. Later
     on he returned to Christianity again and he used
     to say: "Muhammad knows nothing but what I
     have written for him." Then Allah caused him to
     die, and the people buried him, but in the
     morning they saw that the earth had thrown his
     body out. They said, "This is the act of
     Muhammad and his companions. They dug the
     grave of our companion and took his body out of
     it because he had run away from them." They
     again dug the grave deeply for him, but in the
     morning they again saw that the earth had thrown
     his body out. They said, "This is an act of
     Muhammad and his companions. They dug the
     grave of our companion and threw his body
     outside it, for he had run away from them." They
     dug the grave for him as deep as they could, but
     in the morning they again saw that the earth had
     thrown his body out. So they believed that what
     had befallen him was not done by human beings
     and had to leave him thrown (on the ground). 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 815: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When Khosrau perishes,
     there will be no (more) Khosrau after him, and
     when Caesar perishes, there will be no more
     Caesar after him. By Him in Whose Hands
     Muhammad's life is, you will spend the treasures
     of both of them in Allah's Cause." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 816: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Samura: 

     The Prophet said, "When Khosrau perishes,
     there will be no more Khosrau a after him, and
     when Caesar perishes, there will be no more
     Caesar after him," The Prophet also said, "You
     will spend the treasures of both of them in Allah's
     Cause." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 817: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Musailama-al-Kadhdhab (i.e. the liar) came in
     the life-time of Allah's Apostle with many of his
     people (to Medina) and said, "If Muhammad
     makes me his successor, I will follow him."
     Allah's Apostle went up to him with Thabit bin
     Qais bin Shams; and Allah's Apostle was
     carrying a piece of a date-palm leaf in his hand.
     He stood before Musailama (and his
     companions) and said, "If you asked me even
     this piece (of a leaf), I would not give it to you.
     You cannot avoid the fate you are destined to,
     by Allah. If you reject Islam, Allah will destroy
     you. I think that you are most probably the same
     person whom I have seen in the dream." Abu
     Huraira told me that Allah's Apostle; said, "While
     I was sleeping, I saw (in a dream) two gold
     bracelets round my arm, and that worried me too
     much. Then I was instructed divinely in my
     dream, to blow them off and so I blew them off,
     and they flew away. I interpreted the two
     bracelets as symbols of two liars who would
     appear after me. And so one of them was
     Al-Ansi and the other was Musailama
     Al-Kadhdhab from Al-Yamama." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 818: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "In a dream I saw myself
     migrating from Mecca to a place having plenty of
     date trees. I thought that it was Al-Yamama or
     Hajar, but it came to be Medina i.e. Yathrib. In
     the same dream I saw myself moving a sword
     and its blade got broken. It came to symbolize
     the defeat which the Muslims suffered from, on
     the Day of Uhud. I moved the sword again, and
     it became normal as before, and that was the
     symbol of the victory Allah bestowed upon
     Muslims and their gathering together. I saw cows
     in my dream, and by Allah, that was a blessing,
     and they symbolized the believers on the Day of
     Uhud. And the blessing was the good Allah
     bestowed upon us and the reward of true belief
     which Allah gave us after the day of Badr. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 819: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Once Fatima came walking and her gait
     resembled the gait of the Prophet . The Prophet
     said, "Welcome, O my daughter!" Then he made
     her sit on his right or on his left side, and then he
     told her a secret and she started weeping. I
     asked her, "Why are you weeping?" He again
     told her a secret and she started laughing. I said,
     "I never saw happiness so near to sadness as I
     saw today." I asked her what the Prophet had
     told her. She said, "I would never disclose the
     secret of Allah's Apostle ." When the Prophet
     died, I asked her about it. She replied. "The
     Prophet said.) 'Every year Gabriel used to revise
     the Qur'an with me once only, but this year he
     has done so twice. I think this portends my
     death, and you will be the first of my family to
     follow me.' So I started weeping. Then he said.
     'Don't you like to be the mistress of all the ladies
     of Paradise or the mistress of all the lady
     believers? So I laughed for that." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 820: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet in his fatal illness, called his daughter
     Fatima and told her a secret because of which
     she started weeping. Then he called her and told
     her another secret, and she started laughing.
     When I asked her about that, she replied, The
     Prophet told me that he would die in his fatal
     illness, and so I wept, but then he secretly told
     me that from amongst his family, I would be the
     first to join him, and so I laughed." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 821: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     About Ibn 'Abbas: 'Umar bin Al-Khattab used to
     treat Ibn 'Abbas very favorably 'Abdur Rahman
     bin 'Auf said to him. "We also have sons that are
     equal to him (but you are partial to him.)" Umar
     said, "It is because of his knowledge." Then
     'Umar asked Ibn 'Abbas about the interpretation
     of the Verse:- 'When come the Help of Allah and
     the conquest (of Mecca) (110.1) Ibn 'Abbas
     said. "It portended the death of Allah's Apostle,
     which Allah had informed him of." 'Umar said, "I
     do not know from this Verse but what you
     know." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 822: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle in his fatal illness came out,
     wrapped with a sheet, and his head was
     wrapped with an oiled bandage. He sat on the
     pulpit, and praising and glorifying Allah, he said,
     "Now then, people will increase but the Ansar
     will decrease in number, so much so that they,
     compared with the people, will be just like the
     salt in the! meals. So, if any of you should take
     over the authority by which he can either benefit
     some people or harm some others, he should
     accept the goodness of their good people (i.e.
     Ansar) and excuse the faults of their
     wrong-doers." That was the last gathering which
     the Prophet attended. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 823: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     Once the Prophet brought out Al-Hasan and
     took him up the pulpit along with him and said,
     "This son of mine is a Saiyid (i.e. chief) and I
     hope that Allah will help him bring about
     reconciliation between two Muslim groups." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 824: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet had informed us of the death of
     Ja'far and Zaid before the news of their death
     reached us, and his eyes were shedding tears. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 825: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     (Once) the Prophet said, "Have you got
     carpets?" I replied, "Whence can we get
     carpets?" He said, "But you shall soon have
     carpets." I used to say to my wife, "Remove your
     carpets from my sight," but she would say,
     "Didn't the Prophet tell you that you would soon
     have carpets?" So I would give up my request. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 826: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud: 

     Sa'd bin Mu'adh came to Mecca with the
     intention of performing 'Umra, and stayed at the
     house of Umaiya bin Khalaf Abi Safwan, for
     Umaiya himself used to stay at Sa'd's house
     when he passed by Medina on his way to Sham.
     Umaiya said to Sad, "Will you wait till midday
     when the people are (at their homes), then you
     may go and perform the Tawaf round the
     Ka'ba?" So, while Sad was going around the
     Ka'ba, Abu Jahl came and asked, "Who is that
     who is performing Tawaf?" Sad replied, "I am
     Sad." Abu Jahl said, "Are you circumambulating
     the Ka'ba safely although you have given refuge
     to Muhammad and his companions?" Sad said,
     "Yes," and they started quarreling. Umaiya said
     to Sad, "Don't shout at Abi-l-Hakam (i.e. Abu
     Jahl), for he is chief of the valley (of Mecca)."
     Sad then said (to Abu Jahl). 'By Allah, if you
     prevent me from performing the Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba, I will spoil your trade with Sham."
     Umaiya kept on saying to Sad, "Don't raise your
     voice." and kept on taking hold of him. Sad
     became furious and said, (to Umaiya), "Be away
     from me, for I have heard Muhammad saying
     that he will kill you." Umaiiya said, "Will he kill
     me?" Sad said, "Yes,." Umaiya said, "By Allah!
     When Muhammad says a thing, he never tells a
     lie." Umaiya went to his wife and said to her, "Do
     you know what my brother from Yathrib (i.e.
     Medina) has said to me?" She said, "What has he
     said?" He said, "He claims that he has heard
     Muhammad claiming that he will kill me." 

     She said, By Allah! Muhammad never tells a lie."
     So when the infidels started to proceed for Badr
     (Battle) and declared war (against the Muslims),
     his wife said to him, "Don't you remember what
     your brother from Yathrib told you?" Umaiya
     decided not to go but Abu Jahl said to him, "You
     are from the nobles of the valley of Mecca), so
     you should accompany us for a day or two." He
     went with them and thus Allah got him killed. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 827: 

     Narrated Abu Uthman: 

     I got the news that Gabriel came to the Prophet
     while Um Salama was present. Gabriel started
     talking (to the Prophet and then left. The Prophet
     said to Um Salama, "(Do you know) who it
     was?" (or a similar question). She said, "It was
     Dihya (a handsome person amongst the
     companions of the Prophet )." Later on Um
     Salama said, "By Allah! I thought he was none
     but Dihya, till I heard the Prophet talking about
     Gabriel in his sermon." (The Sub-narrator asked
     Abu 'Uthman, "From where have you heard this
     narration?" He replied, "From Usama bin Zaid.") 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 828: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "I saw (in a dream) the
     people assembled in a gathering, and then Abu
     Bakr got up and drew one or two buckets of
     water (from a well) but there was weakness in
     his drawing. May Allah forgive him. Then 'Umar
     took the bucket and in his hands it turned into a
     very large bucket. I had never seen anyone
     amongst: the people who could draw the water
     as strongly as 'Umar till all the people drank their
     fill and watered their camels that knelt down
     there. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 829: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The Jews came to Allah's Apostle and told him
     that a man and a woman from amongst them had
     committed illegal sexual intercourse. Allah's
     Apostle said to them, "What do you find in the
     Torah (old Testament) about the legal
     punishment of Ar-Rajm (stoning)?" They replied,
     (But) we announce their crime and lash them."
     Abdullah bin Salam said, "You are telling a lie;
     Torah contains the order of Rajm." They brought
     and opened the Torah and one of them solaced
     his hand on the Verse of Rajm and read the
     verses preceding and following it. Abdullah bin
     Salam said to him, "Lift your hand." When he
     lifted his hand, the Verse of Rajm was written
     there. They said, "Muhammad has told the truth;
     the Torah has the Verse of Rajm. The Prophet
     then gave the order that both of them should be
     stoned to death. ('Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "I
     saw the man leaning over the woman to shelter
     her from the stones." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 830: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Masud: 

     During the lifetime of the Prophet the moon was
     split into two parts and on that the Prophet said,
     "Bear witness (to thus)." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 831: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     That the Meccan people requested Allah's
     Apostle to show them a miracle, and so he
     showed them the splitting of the moon. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 832: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The moon was split into two parts during the
     lifetime of the Prophet. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 833: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Once two men from the companions of Allah's
     Apostle went out of the house of the Prophet on
     a very dark night. They were accompanied by
     two things that resembled two lamps lighting the
     way in front of them, and when they parted, each
     of them was accompanied by one of those two
     things (lamps) till they reached their homes. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 834: 

     Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba: 

     The Prophet said, "Some of my followers will
     remain victorious (and on the right path) till the
     Last Day comes, and they will still be victorious."


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 835: 

     Narrated Muawiya: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "A group of people
     amongst my followers will remain obedient to
     Allah's orders and they will not be harmed by
     anyone who will not help them or who will
     oppose them, till Allah's Order (the Last Day)
     comes upon them while they are still on the right
     path." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 836: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     That the Prophet gave him one Dinar so as to
     buy a sheep for him. 'Urwa bought two sheep for
     him with the money. Then he sold one of the
     sheep for one Dinar, and brought one Dinar and
     a sheep to the Prophet. On that, the Prophet
     invoked Allah to bless him in his deals. So 'Urwa
     used to gain (from any deal) even if he bought
     dust. (In another narration) 'Urwa said, "I heard
     Allah's Apostle saying, "There is always
     goodness in horses till the Day of Resurrection."
     (The subnarrator added, "I saw 70 horses in
     'Urwa's house.') (Sufyan said, "The Prophet
     asked 'Urwa to buy a sheep for him as a
     sacrifice.") 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 837: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There is always goodness
     in horses till the Day of Resurrection. " 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 838: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "There is always goodness in
     horses. 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 839: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A horse may be kept for one
     of three purposes: for a man it may be a source
     of reward; for another it may be a means of
     living; and for a third it may be a burden (a
     source of committing sins). As for the one for
     whom it is a source of reward, he is the one who
     keeps his horse for the sake of Jihad in Allah's
     Cause; he ties it with a long rope on a pasture or
     in a garden. So whatever its rope allows it to eat,
     will be regarded as good rewardable deeds (for
     its owner). And if it breaks off its rope and jumps
     over one or two hillocks, even its dung will be
     considered amongst his good deeds. And if it
     passes by a river and drinks water from it, that
     will be considered as good deeds for his benefit)
     even if he has had no intention of watering it. A
     horse is a shelter for the one who keeps it so that
     he may earn his living honestly and takes it as a
     refuge to keep him from following illegal ways (of
     gaining money), and does not forget the rights of
     Allah (i.e. paying the Zakat and allowing others
     to use it for Allah's Sake). But a horse is a
     burden (and a source of committing sins for him
     who keeps it out of pride and pretense and with
     the intention of harming the Muslims." 

     The Prophet was asked about donkeys. He
     replied, "Nothing has been revealed to be
     concerning them except this comprehensive
     Verse (which covers everything) :--'Then
     whosoever has done good equal to the weight of
     an atom (or a small ant), Shall see it (its reward)
     And whosoever has done evil equal to the weight
     of an atom (or a small ) ant), Shall see it (Its
     punishment)." (99.7-8) 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 840: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle reached Khaibar in the early
     morning and the people of Khaibar came out
     with their spades, and when they saw the
     Prophet they said, "Muhammad and his army!"
     and returned hurriedly to take refuge in the fort.
     The Prophet raised his hands and said, "Allah is
     Greater! Khaibar is ruined ! If we approach a
     nation, then miserable is the morning of those
     who are warned." 


Volume 4, Book 56, Number 841: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I hear many narrations
     from you but I forget them." He said, "Spread
     your covering sheet." I spread my sheet and he
     moved both his hands as if scooping something
     and emptied them in the sheet and said, "Wrap
     it." I wrapped it round my body, and since then I
     have never forgotten a single Hadith. 




