Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 27: 

 Minor Pilgrammage (Umra)

Volume 3, Book 27, Number 1: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "(The performance of)
     'Umra is an expiation for the sins committed
     (between it and the previous one). And the
     reward of Hajj Mabrur (the one accepted by
     Allah) is nothing except Paradise." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 2: 

     Narrated Ibn Juraij: 

     Ikrima bin Khalid asked Ibn 'Umar about
     performing 'Umra before Hajj. Ibn 'Umar
     replied, "There is no harm in it." 'Ikrima said, "Ibn
     'Umar also said, 'The Prophet had performed
     'Umra before performing Hajj.'" 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 3: 

     Narrated 'Ikrima bin Khalid: 

     "I asked Ibn 'Umar the same (as above)." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 4: 

     Narrated Mujahid: 

     Ursa bin AzZubair and I entered the Mosque (of
     the Prophet) and saw 'Abdullah bin Umar sitting
     near the dwelling place of Aisha and some
     people were offering the Duha prayer. We asked
     him about their prayer and he replied that it was
     a heresy. He (Ursa) then asked him how many
     times the Prophet had performed 'Umra. He
     replied, 'Four times; one of them was in the
     month of Rajab." We disliked to contradict him.
     Then we heard 'Aisha, the Mother of faithful
     believers cleaning her teeth with Siwak in the
     dwelling place. 'Ursa said, "O Mother! O
     Mother of the believers! Don't you hear what
     Abu 'Abdur Rahman is saying?" She said, "What
     does he say?" 'Ursa said, "He says that Allah's
     Apostle performed four 'Umra and one of them
     was in the month of Rajab." 'Aisha said, "May
     Allah be merciful to Abu 'Abdur Rahman! The
     Prophet did not perform any 'Umra except that
     he was with him, and he never performed any
     'Umra in Rajab." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 5: 

     Narrated 'Ursa bin Az-Zubair: 

     I asked 'Aisha (whether the Prophet had
     performed 'Umra in Rajab). She replied, "Allah's
     Apostle never performed any 'Umra in Rajab." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 6: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     I asked Anas how many times the Prophet had
     performed 'Umra. He replied, "Four times. 1.
     'Umra of Hudaibiya in Dhi-l-Qa'da when the
     pagans hindered him; 2. 'Umra in the following
     year in Dhi-l-Qa'da after the peace treaty with
     them (the pagans); 3. 'Umra from Al-Jr'rana
     where he distributed the war booty." I think he
     meant the booty (of the battle) of Hunain. I
     asked, "How many times did he perform Hajj?"
     He (Anas) replied, "Once. " 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 7: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     I asked Anas (about the Prophet's 'Umra) and he
     replied, "The Prophet performed 'Umra when the
     pagans made him return, and Umra of
     al-Hudaibiya (the next year), and another 'Umra
     in Dhi-l-Qa'da, and another 'Umra in
     combination with his Hajj." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 8: 

     Narrated Hammam: 

     The Prophet performed four 'Umra (three) in
     Dhi-l-Qa'da except the (one) 'Umra which he
     performed with his Hajj: His 'Umra from
     Al-hudaibiya, and the one of the following year,
     and the one from Al-Jr'rana where he distributed
     the booty (of the battle) of Hunain, and another
     'Umra with his Hajj. 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 9: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     I asked Masruq, 'Ata' and Mujahid (about the
     'Umra of Allah's Apostle). They said, "Allah's
     Apostle had performed 'Umra in Dhi-l-Qa'da
     before he performed Hajj." I heard Al-Bara' bin
     'Azib saying, "Allah's Apostle had performed
     'Umra in Dhi-l-Qa'da twice before he performed
     Hajj." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 10: 

     Narrated Ata: 

     I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, "Allah's Apostle
     asked an Ansari woman (Ibn 'Abbas named her
     but 'Ata' forgot her name), 'What prevented you
     from performing Hajj with us?' She replied, 'We
     have a camel and the father of so-and-so and his
     son (i.e. her husband and her son) rode it and left
     one camel for us to use for irrigation.' He said (to
     her), 'Perform 'Umra when Ramadan comes, for
     'Umra in Ramadan is equal to Hajj (in reward),'
     or said something similar." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 11: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     We set out along with Allah's Apostle shortly
     before the appearance of the new moon
     (crescent) of the month of Dhi-l-Hijja and he said
     to us, "Whoever wants to assume Ihram for Hajj
     may do so; and whoever wants to assume Ihram
     for 'Umra may do so. Hadn't I brought the Hadi
     (animal for sacrificing) (with me), I would have
     assumed Ihram for 'Umra." ('Aisha added,): So
     some of us assumed Ihram for 'Umra while the
     others for Hajj. I was amongst those who
     assumed Ihram for 'Umra. The day of 'Arafat
     approached and I was still menstruating. I
     complained to the Prophet (about that) and he
     said, "Abandon your 'Umra, undo and comb
     your hair, and assume Ihram for Hajj;." When it
     was the night of Hasba, he sent 'Abdur Rahman
     with me to At-Tan'im and I assumed Ihram for
     'Umra (and performed it) in lieu of my missed
     'Umra. 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 12: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Aus: 

     Abdul Rahman bin Abu Bakr told me that the
     Prophet had ordered him to let 'Aisha ride
     behind him and to make he perform 'Umra from
     At-Tan'im. 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 13: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet and his companions assumed Ihram
     for Hajj and none except the Prophet and Talha
     had the Hadi with them. 'Ali had come from
     Yemen and he had the Hadi with him. He ('Ali)
     said, "I have assumed Ihram with an intention like
     that of Allah's Apostle has assumed it." The
     Prophet ordered his companions to intend the
     Ihram with which they had come for 'Umra, to
     perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba (and between
     Safa and Marwa), to get their hair cut short and
     then to finish their Ihram with the exception of
     those who had the Hadi with them. They asked,
     "Shall we go to Mina and the private organs of
     some of us are dribbling (if we finish Ihram and
     have sexual relations with our wives)?" The
     Prophet heard that and said, "Had I known what
     I know now, I would not have brought the Hadi.
     If I did not have the Hadi with me I would have
     finished my Ihram." 'Aisha got her menses and
     performed all the ceremonies (of Hajj) except the
     Tawaf . So when she became clean from her
     menses, and she had performed the Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba, she said, "O Allah's Apostle! You
     (people) are returning with both Hajj and 'Umra
     and I am returning only with Hajj!" So, he
     ordered 'Abdur Rahman bin Abu Bakr to go
     with her to At-Tan'im. Thus she performed
     'Umra after the Hajj in the month of Dhi-l-Hijja.
     Suraqa bin Malik bin Ju'sham met the Prophet at
     Al-'Aqaba (Jamrat-ul 'Aqaba) while the latter
     was stoning it and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Is
     this permissible only for you?" The Prophet
     replied, "No, it is for ever (i.e. it is permissible for
     all Muslims to perform 'Umra before Hajj." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 14: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We set out with Allah's Apostle shortly before
     the appearance of the new moon of Dhi-l-Hiija
     and he said, "Whoever wants to assume Ihram
     for 'Umra may do so, and whoever wants to
     assume Ihram for Hajj may do so. Had not I
     brought the Hadi with me, I would have assumed
     Ihram for 'Umra." Some of the people assumed
     Ihram for 'Umra while others for Hajj. I was
     amongst those who had assumed Ihram for
     'Umra. I got my menses before entering Mecca,
     and was menstruating till the day of 'Arafat. I
     complained to Allah's Apostle about it, he said,
     "Abandon your 'Umra, undo and comb your hair,
     and assume Ihram for Hajj." So, I did that
     accordingly. When it was the night of Hasba (day
     of departure from Mina), the Prophet sent
     'Abdur Rahman with me to At-Tanim. 

     The sub-narrator adds: He ('AbdurRahman) let
     her ride behind him. And she assumed Ihram for
     'Umra in lieu of the abandoned one. Aisha
     completed her Hajj and 'Umra, and no Hadi,
     Sadaqa (charity), or fasting was obligatory for
     her. 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 15: 

     Narrated Al-Aswad: 

     That 'Aisha said, "O Allah's Apostle! The people
     are returning after performing the two Nusuks
     (i.e. Hajj and 'Umra) but I am returning with one
     only?" He said, "Wait till you become clean from
     your menses and then go to At-Tan'im, assume
     Ihram (and after performing 'Umra) join us at
     such-and-such a place. But it (i.e. the reward if
     'Umra) is according to your expenses or the
     hardship (which you will undergo while
     performing it)." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 16: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We set out assuming the Ihram for Hajj in the
     months of Hajj towards the sacred precincts of
     Hajj. We dismounted at Sarif and the Prophet
     said to his companions, "Whoever has not got
     the Hadi with him and likes to make it as 'Umra,
     he should do it, but he who has got the Hadi with
     him should not do it." The Prophet and some of
     his wealthy companions had the Hadi with them,
     so they did not finish Ihram after performing the
     'Umra. The Prophet came to me while I was
     weeping. He asked me the reason for it. I
     replied, "I have heard of what you have said to
     your companions and I cannot do the 'Umra." He
     asked me, "What is the matter with you?" I
     replied, "I am not praying." He said, "There is no
     harm in it as you are one of the daughters of
     Adam and the same is written for you as for
     others. So, you should perform Hajj and I hope
     that Allah will enable you to perform the 'Umra
     as well." So, I carried on till we departed from
     Mina and halted at Al-Mahassab. The Prophet
     called 'Abdur-Rahman and said, "Go out of the
     sanctuary with your sister and let her assume
     Ihram for 'Umra, and after both of you have
     finished the Tawaf I will be waiting for you at this
     place." We came back at mid-night and the
     Prophet asked us, "Have you finished?" I replied
     in the affirmative. He announced the departure
     and the people set out for the journey and some
     of them had performed the Tawaf of the Ka'ba
     before the morning prayer, and after that the
     Prophet set out for Medina. 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 17: 

     Narrated Safwan bin Ya'la bin Umaiya from his
     father who said: 

     "A man came to the Prophet while he was at
     Ji'rana. The man was wearing a cloak which had
     traces of Khaluq or Sufra (a kind of perfume).
     The man asked (the Prophet ), 'What do you
     order me to perform in my 'Umra?' So, Allah
     inspired the Prophet divinely and he was
     screened by a place of cloth. I wished to see the
     Prophet being divinely inspired. 'Umar said to
     me, 'Come! Will you be pleased to look at the
     Prophet while Allah is inspiring him?' I replied in
     the affirmative. 'Umar lifted one corner of the
     cloth and I looked at the Prophet who was
     snoring. (The sub-narrator thought that he said:
     The snoring was like that of a camel). When that
     state was over, the Prophet asked, "Where is the
     questioner who asked about 'Umra? Put off your
     cloak and wash away the traces of Khaluq from
     your body and clean the Sufra (yellow color) and
     perform in your Umra what you perform in your
     Hajj (i.e. the Tawaf round the Ka'ba and the Sa'i
     between Safa and Marwa). " 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 18: 

     Narrated Hisham Ibn 'Urwa from his father who
     said: 

     While I was a youngster, I asked 'Aisha the wife
     of the Prophet. "What about the meaning of the
     Statement of Allah; 

     "Verily! (the mountains) As-Safa and Al Marwa,
     are among the symbols of Allah. So, it is not
     harmful if those who perform Hajj or 'Umra of
     the House (Ka'ba at Mecca) to perform the
     going (Tawaf) between them? (2.158) I
     understand (from that) that there is no harm if
     somebody does not perform the Tawaf between
     them." 'Aisha replied, "No, for if it were as you
     are saying, then the recitation would have been
     like this: 'It is not harmful not to perform Tawaf
     between them.' This verse was revealed in
     connection with the Ansar who used to assume
     the Ihram for the idol Manat which was put
     beside a place called Qudaid and those people
     thought it not right to perform the Tawaf of
     As-Safa and Al-Marwa. When Islam came, they
     asked Allah's Apostle about that, and Allah
     revealed:-- 

     "Verily! (the mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa
     Are among the symbols of Allah. So, it is not
     harmful of those who perform Hajj or 'Umra of
     the House (Ka'ba at Mecca) to perform the
     going (Tawaf) between them." (2.158) Sufyan
     and Abu Muawiya added from Hisham (from
     'Aisha): "The Hajj or 'Umra of the person who
     does not perform the going (Tawaf) between
     As-Safa and Al-Marwa is incomplete in Allah's
     sight. 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 19: 

     Narrated Isma'il: 

     Abdullah bin Abu Aufa said: "Allah's Apostle
     performed 'Umra and we too performed 'Umra
     along with him. When he entered Mecca he
     performed the Tawaf (of Ka'ba) and we too
     performed it along with him, and then he came to
     the As-Safa and Al-Marwa (i.e. performed the
     Sai) and we also came to them along with him.
     We were shielding him from the people of
     Mecca lest they may hit him with an arrow." A
     friend of his asked him (i.e. 'Abdullah bin Aufa),
     "Did the Prophet enter the Ka'ba (during that
     'Umra)?" He replied in the negative. Then he
     said, "What did he (the Prophet ) say about
     Khadija?" He (Abdullah bin Aufa) said, "(He
     said) 'Give Khadija the good tidings that she will
     have a palace made of Qasab in Paradise and
     there will be neither noise nor any trouble in it." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 20: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Dinar: 

     We asked Ibn 'Umar whether a man who had
     performed the Tawaf of the Ka'ba but had not
     performed the Tawaf between As-Safa and
     Al-Marwa yet, was permitted to have sexual
     relation with his wife. He replied, "The Prophet
     arrived (at Mecca) and circumambulated the
     Ka'ba seven times and then offered a two Rak'at
     prayer behind Maqam-lbrahim and then
     performed the going (Tawaf) between As-Safa
     and Al-Marwa (seven times) (and verily, in
     Allah's Apostle you have a good example." And
     we asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah (the same question)
     and he replied, "He should not go near her till he
     has finished the going (Tawaf) between As-Safa
     and Al-Marwa." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 21: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari: 

     I came to the Prophet at Al-Batha' while his
     camel was kneeling down and he asked me,
     "Have you intended to perform the Hajj?" I
     replied in the affirmative. He asked me, 'With
     what intention have you assumed Ihram?" I
     replied, "I have assumed Ihram with the same
     intention as that of the Prophet. He said, "You
     have done well. Perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba
     and (the Sai) between As-safa and Al-Marwa
     and then finish the Ihram." So, I performed the
     Tawaf around the Ka'ba and the Sai) between
     As-Safa and Al-Marwa and then went to a
     woman of the tribe of Qais who cleaned my head
     from lice. Later I assumed the Ihram for Hajj. I
     used to give the verdict of doing the same till the
     caliphate of 'Umar who said, "If you follow the
     Holy Book then it orders you to remain in the
     state of Ihram till you finish from Hajj, if you
     follow the Prophet then he did not finish his
     Ihram till the Hadi (sacrifice) had reached its
     place of slaughtering (Hajj-al-Qiran)." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 22: 

     Narrated Al-Aswad: 

     Abdullah the slave of Asma bint Abu Bakr, told
     me that he used to hear Asma', whenever she
     passed by Al-Hajun, saying, "May Allah bless
     His Apostle Muhammad. Once we dismounted
     here with him, and at that time we were traveling
     with light luggage; we had a few riding animals
     and a little food ration. I, my sister, 'Aisha,
     Az-Zubair and such and such persons performed
     'Umra, and when we had passed our hands over
     the Ka'ba (i.e. performed Tawaf round the
     Ka'ba and between As-Safa and Al-Marwa) we
     finished our lhram. Later on we assumed Ihram
     for Hajj the same evening." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 23: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle returned from a
     Ghazwa, Hajj or 'Umra, he used to say Takbir
     thrice at every elevation of the ground and then
     would say, "None has the right to be worshipped
     but Allah; He is One and has no partner. All the
     kingdoms is for Him, and all the praises are for
     Him, and He is Omnipotent. We are returning
     with repentance, worshipping, prostrating, and
     praising our Lord. He has kept up His promise
     and made His slave victorious, and He Alone
     defeated all the clans of (non-believers)." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 24: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When the Prophet arrived at Mecca, some boys
     of the tribe of Bani 'Abdul Muttalib went to
     receive him, and the Prophet made one of them
     ride in front of him and the other behind him. 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 25: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle left for Mecca, he
     used to pray in the mosque of Ash-Shajra, and
     when he returned (to Medina), he used to pray in
     the middle of the valley of Dhul-Hulaifa and used
     to pass the night there till morning. 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 26: 

     Narrated Anas: The Prophet never returned to
     his family from a journey at night. He 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 27: 

     Narrated Jabir: The Prophet forbade going to
     one's family at night (on arrival from a 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 28: 

     Narrated Humaid: 

     Anas said, "Whenever Allah's Apostle returned
     from a journey, he, on seeing the high places of
     Medina, would make his she-camel proceed
     faster; and if it were another animal, even then he
     used to make it proceed faster." 

     Narrated Humaid that the Prophet used to make
     it proceed faster out of his love for Medina. 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 29: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     As above, but mentioned "the walls of Medina"
     instead of "the high places of Medina. Al-Harith
     bin Umar agrees with Anas. 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 30: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     I heard Al-Bara' saying, "The above Verse was
     revealed regarding us, for the Ansar on returning
     from Hajj never entered their houses through the
     proper doors but from behind. One of the Ansar
     came and entered through the door and he was
     taunted for it. Therefore, the following was
     revealed: -- 

     "It is not righteousness That you enter the houses
     from the back, But the righteous man is He who
     fears Allah, Obeys His order and keeps away
     from What He has forbidden So, enter houses
     through the proper doors." (2.189) 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 31: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Traveling is a kind of torture
     as it prevents one from eating, drinking and
     sleeping properly. So, when one's needs are
     fulfilled, one should return quickly to one's
     family." 


Volume 3, Book 27, Number 32: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Aslam from his father: 

     I was with Ibn 'Umar on the way to Mecca, and
     he got the news that Safiya bint Abu Ubaid was
     seriously ill. So, he hastened his pace, and when
     the twilight disappeared, he dismounted and
     offered the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers together.
     Then he said, "I saw that whenever the Prophet
     had to hasten when traveling, he would delay the
     Maghrib prayer and join them together (i.e. offer
     the Maghrib and the Isha prayers together)." 

Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 28: 

    Pilgrims Prevented from
           Completing the
             Pilgrimmage 



Volume 3, Book 28, Number 33: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     When Abdullah bin Umar set out for Mecca
     intending to perform Umra, at the time of
     afflictions, he said, "If I should be prevented from
     reaching the Kaba, then I would do the same as
     Allah's Apostle did, so I assume the lhram for
     Umra as Allah's Apostle assumed the Ihram for
     Umra in the year of Hudaibiya." 


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 34: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     That Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah and Salim bin
     'Abdullah informed him that they told Ibn 'Umar
     when Ibn Az-Zubair was attacked by the army,
     saying "There is no harm for you if you did not
     perform Hajj this year. We are afraid that you
     may be prevented from reaching the Kaba." Ibn
     'Umar said "We set out with Allah's Apostle and
     the non-believers of Quraish prevented us from
     reaching the Ka'ba, and so the Prophet
     slaughtered his Hadi and got his head shaved."
     Ibn 'Umar added, "I make you witnesses that I
     have made 'Umra obligatory for me. And, Allah
     willing, I will go and then if the way to Ka'ba is
     clear, I will perform the Tawaf, but if I am
     prevented from going to the Ka'ba then I will do
     the same as the Prophet did while I was in his
     company." Ibn 'Umar then assumed Ihram for
     Umra from Dhul-Hulaifa and proceeded for a
     while and said, "The conditions of 'Umra and
     Hajj are similar and I make you witnesses that I
     have made 'Umra and Hajj obligatory for
     myself." So, he did not finish the Ihram till the day
     of Nahr (slaughtering) came, and he slaughtered
     his Hadi. He used to say, "I will not finish the
     Ihram till I perform the Tawaf, one Tawaf on the
     day of entering Mecca (i.e. of Safa and Marwa
     for both 'Umra and Hajj)." 


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 35: 

     Narrated Nafi: Some of the sons of 'Abdullah
     told him (i.e. 'Abdullah) if he had sta 


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 36: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle was prevented from performing
     ('Umra) Therefore, he shaved his head and had
     sexual relations with his wives and slaughtered his
     Hadi and performed Umra in the following year. 


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 37: 

     Narrated Salim: 

     (Abdullah) bin 'Umar used to say, "Is not (the
     following of) the tradition of Allah's Apostle
     sufficient for you? If anyone of you is prevented
     from performing Hajj, he should perform the
     Tawaf of the Ka'ba and between As-Safa and
     Al-Marwa and then finish the Ihram and
     everything will become legal for him which was
     illegal for him (during the state of Ihram) and he
     can perform Hajj in a following year and he
     should slaughter a Hadi or fast in case he cannot
     afford the Hadi." 


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 38: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar: 

     Allah's Apostle slaughtered (the Hadi) before he
     had his head shaved and then he ordered his
     Companions to do the same. 


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 39: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     That Abdullah and Salim said to 'Abdullah bin
     'Umar, "(You should not go for Hajj this year)."
     'Abdullah bin 'Umar replied, "We set out with the
     Prophet (to Mecca for performing 'Umra) and e
     infidels of Quraish prevented us from reaching
     the Ka'ba. Allah's Apostle slaughtered his Budn
     (camels for sacrifice) and got his head shaved." 


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 40: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     When Abdullah bin 'Umar set out for Mecca
     with the intentions performing 'Umra in the period
     of afflictions, he said, "If I should be prevented
     from reaching the Ka'ba, then I would do the
     same as we did while in the company of Allah's
     Apostle ." So, he assumed the Ihram for 'Umra
     since the Prophet had assumed the Ihram for
     'Umra in the year of Al-Hudaibiya. Then
     'Abdullah bin 'Umar thought about it and said,
     "The conditions for both Hajj and 'Umra are
     similar." He then turned towards his companions
     and said, "The conditions of both Hajj and 'Umra
     are similar and I make you witnesses that I have
     made the performance of Hajj obligatory for
     myself along with 'Umra." He then performed
     one Tawaf (between As-Safa and Al-Marwa)
     for both of them (i.e. Hajj and ('Umra) and
     considered that to be sufficient for him and
     offered a Hadi. 


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 41: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Layla: 

     Ka'b bin 'Ujra said that Allah's Apostle said to
     him (Ka'b), "Perhaps your lice have troubled
     you?" Ka'b replied, "Yes! O Allah's Apostle."
     Allah's Apostle said, "Have your head shaved
     and then either fast three days or feed six poor
     persons or slaughter one sheep as a sacrifice." 


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 42: 

     Narrated Ka'b bin 'Umra: 

     Allah's Apostle stood beside me at Al-Hudaibiya
     and the lice were falling from my head in great
     number. He asked me, "Have your lice troubled
     you?" I replied in the affirmative. He ordered me
     to get my head shaved. Ka'b added, "This Holy
     Verse:--'And if any of you is ill, or has ailment in
     his scalp (2.196), etc. was revealed regarding
     me. "The Prophet then ordered me either to fast
     three days, or to feed six poor persons with one
     Faraq (three Sas) (of dates), or to slaughter a
     sheep, etc (sacrifice) whatever was available. 


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 43: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ma'qal: 

     I sat with Ka'b bin 'Ujra and asked him about the
     Fidya. He replied, "This revelation was revealed
     concerning my case especially, but it is also for
     you in general. I was carried to Allah's Apostle
     and the lice were falling in great number on my
     face. The Prophet said, "I have never thought
     that your ailment (or struggle) has reached to
     such an extent as I see. Can you afford a sheep?"
     I replied in the negative. He then said, "Fast for
     three days, or feed six poor persons each with
     half a Sa of food." (1 Sa = 3 Kilograms approx.)


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 44: 

     Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Layla: 

     (Reporting the speech of Ka'b bin Umra) Allah's
     Apostle saw him (i.e. Ka'b) while the lice were
     falling on his face. He asked (him), "Have your
     lice troubled you?" He replied in the affirmative.
     So, he ordered him to get his head shaved while
     he was at Al-Hudaibiya. At that time they were
     not permitted to finish their Ihram, and were still
     hoping to enter Mecca. So, Allah revealed the
     verses of Al-Fidya. Allah's Apostle ordered him
     to feed six poor persons with one Faraq of food
     or to slaughter one sheep (as a sacrifice) or to
     fast for three days. 


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 45: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever performs Hajj to
     this House (Ka'ba) and does not approach his
     wife for sexual relations nor commits sins (while
     performing Hajj), he will come out as sinless as a
     newly-born child. (Just delivered by his mother)."


Volume 3, Book 28, Number 46: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever performs Hajj to
     this Ka'ba and does not approach his wife for
     sexual relations nor commit sins (while
     performing Hajj), he will come out as sinless as a
     new-born child, (just delivered by his mother)." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 29: 

 Penalty of Hunting while on
             Pilgrimmage 



Volume 3, Book 29, Number 47: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada: 

     My father set out (for Mecca) in the year of
     Al-Hudaibiya, and his companions assumed
     Ihram, but he did not. At that time the Prophet
     was informed that an enemy wanted to attack
     him, so the Prophet proceeded onwards. While
     my father was among his companions, some of
     them laughed among themselves. (My father
     said), "I looked up and saw an onager. I
     attacked, stabbed and caught it. I then sought my
     companions' help but they refused to help me.
     (Later) we all ate its meat. We were afraid that
     we might be left behind (separated) from the
     Prophet so I went in search of the Prophet and
     made my horse to run at a galloping speed at
     times and let it go slow at an ordinary speed at
     other times till I met a man from the tribe of Bani
     Ghifar at midnight. I asked him, "Where did you
     leave the Prophet ?" He replied, "I left him at
     Ta'hun and he had the intention of having the
     midday rest at As-Suqya. I followed the trace
     and joined the Prophet and said, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! Your people (companions) send you
     their compliments, and (ask for) Allah's Blessings
     upon you. They are afraid lest they may be left
     behind; so please wait for them.' I added, 'O
     Allah's Apostle! I hunted an onager and some of
     its meat is with me. The Prophet told the people
     to eat it though all of them were in the state of
     Ihram." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 48: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada: 

     That his father said "We proceeded with the
     Prophet in the year of Al-Hudaibiya and his
     companions assumed Ihram but I did not. We
     were informed that some enemies were at
     Ghaiqa and so we went on towards them. My
     companions saw an onager and some of them
     started laughing among themselves. I looked and
     saw it. I chased it with my horse and stabbed
     and caught it. I wanted some help from my
     companions but they refused. (I slaughtered it all
     alone). We all ate from it (i.e. its meat). Then I
     followed Allah's Apostle lest we should be left
     behind. At times I urged my horse to run at a
     galloping speed and at other times at an ordinary
     slow speed. On the way I met a man from the
     tribe of Bani Ghifar at midnight. I asked him
     where he had left Allah's Apostle . The man
     replied that he had left the Prophet at a place
     called Ta'hun and he had the intention of having
     the midday rest at As-Suqya. So, I followed
     Allah's Apostle till I reached him and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I have been sent by my
     companions who send you their greetings and
     compliments and ask for Allah's Mercy and
     Blessings upon you. They were afraid lest the
     enemy might intervene between you and them; so
     please wait for them." So he did. Then I said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! We have hunted an onager and
     have some of it (i.e. its meat) left over." Allah's
     Apostle told his companions to eat the meat
     although all of them were in a state of Ihram." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 49: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     We were in the company of the Prophet at a
     place called Al-Qaha (which is at a distance of
     three stages of journey from Medina). Abu
     Qatada narrated through another group of
     narrators: We were in the company of the
     Prophet at a place called Al-Qaha and some of
     us had assumed Ihram while the others had not. I
     noticed that some of my companions were
     watching something, so I looked up and saw an
     onager. (I rode my horse and took the spear and
     whip) but my whip fell down (and I asked them
     to pick it up for me) but they said, "We will not
     help you by any means as we are in a state of
     Ihram." So, I picked up the whip myself and
     attacked the onager from behind a hillock and
     slaughtered it and brought it to my companions.
     Some of them said, "Eat it." While some others
     said, "Do not eat it." So, I went to the Prophet
     who was ahead of us and asked him about it, He
     replied, "Eat it as it is Halal (i.e. it is legal to eat
     it)." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 50: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada: 

     That his father had told him that Allah's Apostle
     set out for Hajj and so did his companions. He
     sent a batch of his companions by another route
     and Abu Qatada was one of them. The Prophet
     said to them, "Proceed along the sea-shore till
     we meet all together." So, they took the route of
     the sea-shore, and when they started all of them
     assumed Ihram except Abu Qatada. While they
     were proceeding on, his companions saw a
     group of onagers. Abu Qatada chased the
     onagers and attacked and wounded a
     she-onager. They got down and ate some of its
     meat and said to each other: "How do we eat the
     meat of the game while we are in a state of
     Ihram?" So, we (they) carried the rest of the
     she-onager's meat, and when they met Allah's
     Apostle they asked, saying, "O Allah's Apostle!
     We assumed Ihram with the exception of Abu
     Qatada and we saw (a group) of onagers. Abu
     Qatada attacked them and wounded a
     she-onager from them. Then we got down and
     ate from its meat. Later, we said, (to each other),
     'How do we eat the meat of the game and we
     are in a state of Ihram?' So, we carried the rest
     of its meat. The Prophet asked, "Did anyone of
     you order Abu Qatada to attack it or point at it?"
     They replied in the negative. He said, "Then eat
     what is left of its meat." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 51: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     From As-Sa'b bin Jath-thama Al-Laithi that the
     latter presented an onager to Allah's Apostle
     while he was at Al-Abwa' or at Waddan, and he
     refused it. On noticing the signs of some
     unpleasant feeling of disappointment on his
     (As-Sab's) face, the Prophet said to him, "I have
     only returned it because I am Muhrim." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 52: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "It is not sinful of a Muhrim
     to kill five kinds of animals." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 53: 

     One of the wives of the Prophet narrated: 

     The Prophet said, "A Muhrim can kill (five kinds
     of animals.)" 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 54: 

     Narrated Hafsa: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "It is not sinful (of a
     Muhrim) to kill five kinds of animals, namely: the
     crow, the kite, the mouse, the scorpion and the
     rabid dog." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 55: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Five kinds of animals are
     harmful and could be killed in the Haram
     (Sanctuary). These are: the crow, the kite, the
     scorpion, the mouse and the rabid dog." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 56: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     While we were in the company of the Prophet in
     a cave at Mina, when Surat-wal-Mursalat were
     revealed and he recited it and I heard it (directly)
     from his mouth as soon as he recited its
     revelation. Suddenly a snake sprang at us and the
     Prophet said (ordered us): "Kill it." We ran to kill
     it but it escaped quickly. The Prophet said, "It
     has escaped your evil and you too have escaped
     its evil." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 57: 

     Narrated 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet: 

     Allah's Apostle called the salamander a bad
     animal, but I did not hear him ordering it to be
     killed." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 58: 

     Narrated Said bin Abu Said Al-Maqburi: 

     Abu Shuraih, Al-'Adawi said that he had said to
     'Amr bin Sa'id when he was sending the troops
     to Mecca (to fight 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair), "O
     Chief! Allow me to tell you what Allah's Apostle
     said on the day following the Conquest of
     Mecca. My ears heard that and my heart
     understood it thoroughly and I saw with my own
     eyes the Prophet when he, after Glorifying and
     Praising Allah, started saying, 'Allah, not the
     people, made Mecca a sanctuary, so anybody
     who has belief in Allah and the Last Day should
     neither shed blood in it, nor should he cut down
     its trees. If anybody tells (argues) that fighting in it
     is permissible on the basis that Allah's Apostle
     did fight in Mecca, say to him, 'Allah allowed His
     Apostle and did not allow you.' "Allah allowed
     me only for a few hours on that day (of the
     conquest) and today its sanctity is valid as it was
     before. So, those who are present should inform
     those who are absent (concerning this fact." Abu
     Shuraih was asked, "What did 'Amr reply?" He
     said, ('Amr said) 'O Abu Shuraih! I know better
     than you in this respect Mecca does not give
     protection to a sinner, a murderer or a thief." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 59: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     "The Prophet said, 'Allah has made Mecca, a
     sanctuary, so it was a sanctuary before me and
     will continue to be a sanctuary after me. It was
     made legal for me (i.e. I was allowed to fight in
     it) for a few hours of a day. It is not allowed to
     uproot its shrubs or to cut its trees, or to chase
     (or disturb) its game, or to pick up its luqata
     (fallen things) except by a person who would
     announce that (what he has found) publicly.'
     Al-'Abbas said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Except
     Al-ldhkhir (a kind of grass) (for it is used) by our
     goldsmiths and for our graves.' The Prophet then
     said, 'Except Al-idhkhir.' " 'Ikrima said, 'Do you
     know what "chasing or disturbing" the game
     means? It means driving it out of the shade to
     occupy its place." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 60: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     their blacksmiths and for their domestic
     purposes)." So, the Prophet s 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 61: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle was cupped while he was in a
     state of Ihram. 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 62: 

     Narrated Ibn Buhaina: The Prophet, while in the
     state of Ihram, was cupped at the middle of his
     head at Liha-Jamal. 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 63: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet married Maimuna while he was in
     the state of Ihram, (only the ceremonies of
     marriage were held). 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 64: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     A person stood up and asked, "O Allah's:
     Apostle! What clothes may be worn in the state
     of Ihram?" The Prophet replied, "Do not wear a
     shirt or trousers, or any headgear (e.g. a turban),
     or a hooded cloak; but if somebody has no
     shoes he can wear leather stockings provided
     they are cut short off the ankles, and also, do not
     wear anything perfumed with Wars or saffron,
     and the Muhrima (a woman in the state of Ihram)
     should not cover her face, or wear gloves." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 65: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     A man was crushed to death by his she-camel
     and was brought to Allah's Apostle who said,
     "Give him a bath and shroud him, but do not
     cover his head, and do not bring any perfume
     near to him, as he will be resurrected reciting
     Talbiya." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 66: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Hunain: 

     Abdullah bin Al-Abbas and Al-Miswar bin
     Makhrama differed at Al-Abwa'; Ibn 'Abbas
     said that a Muhrim could wash his head; while
     Al-Miswar maintained that he should not do so.
     'Abdullah bin 'Abbas sent me to Abu Aiyub
     Al-Ansari and I found him bathing between the
     two wooden posts (of the well) and was
     screened with a sheet of cloth. I greeted him and
     he asked who I was. I replied, "I am 'Abdullah
     bin Hunain and I have been sent to you by Ibn
     'Abbas to ask you how Allah's Apostle used to
     wash his head while in the state of lhram." Abu
     Aiyub Al-Ansarl caught hold of the sheet of cloth
     and lowered it till his head appeared before me,
     and then told somebody to pour water on his
     head. He poured water on his head, and he (Abu
     Aiyub) rubbed his head with his hands by
     bringing them from back to front and from front
     to back and said, "I saw the Prophet doing like
     this." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 67: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     I heard the Prophet delivering a sermon at
     'Arafat saying, "If a Muhrim does not find
     slippers, he could wear Khuffs (but he has to cut
     short the Khuffs below the ankles), and if he
     does not find an Izar (a waist sheet for wrapping
     the lower half of the body) he could wear
     trousers." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 68: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle was asked what sort of clothes a
     Muhrim should wear. He replied, "He should not
     wear a shirt, turbans, trousers, a hooded cloak,
     or a dress perfumed with saffron or Wars; and if
     slippers are not available he can wear Khuffs but
     he should cut them so that they reach below the
     ankles. 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 69: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet delivered a sermon at 'Arafat and
     said, "Whoever does not get an Izar can wear
     trousers, and whoever cannot get a pair of shoes
     can wear Khuffs." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 70: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The Prophet assumed Ihram for Umra in the
     month of Dhul-Qa'da but the (pagan) people of
     Mecca refused to admit him into Mecca till he
     agreed on the condition that he would not bring
     into Mecca any arms but sheathed. 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 71: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet fixed Dhul-Hulaifa as the Miqat (the
     place for assuming Ihram) for the people of
     Medina, and Qaran-al-Manazil for the people of
     Najd, and Yalamlam for the people of Yemen.
     These Mawaqit are for those people and also for
     those who come through these Mawaqit (from
     places other than the above-mentioned) with the
     intention of (performing) Hajj and Umra. And
     those living inside these Mawaqit can assume
     Ihram from the place where they start; even the
     people of Mecca can assume Ihram from
     Mecca. 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 72: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle entered Mecca in the year of its
     Conquest wearing an Arabian helmet on his head
     and when the Prophet took it off, a person came
     and said, "Ibn Khatal is holding the covering of
     the Ka'ba (taking refuge in the Ka'ba)." The
     Prophet said, "Kill him." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 73: 

     Narrated Ya'li: 

     ame as you do in your Hajj." A man bit the hand
     of another man but in 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 74: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 75: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     While a man was standing with the Prophet at
     'Arafat, he fell from his Mount and his neck was
     crushed by it. The Prophet said, "Wash the
     deceased with water and Sidr and shroud him in
     two pieces of cloth, and neither perfume him nor
     cover his head, for Allah will resurrect him on the
     Day of Resurrection and he will be reciting
     Talbiya." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 76: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     A man was in the company of the Prophet and
     his she-camel crushed his neck while he was in a
     state of Ihram and he died Allah's Apostle said,
     "Wash him with water and Sidr and shroud him
     in his two garments; neither perfume him nor
     cover his head, for he will be resurrected on the
     Day of Resurrection, reciting Talbiya." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 77: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     A woman from the tribe of Juhaina came to the
     Prophet and said, "My mother had vowed to
     perform Hajj but she died before performing it.
     May I perform Hajj on my mother's behalf?" The
     Prophet replied, "Perform Hajj on her behalf.
     Had there been a debt on your mother, would
     you have paid it or not? So, pay Allah's debt as
     He has more right to be paid." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 78: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     A woman from the tribe of Khath'am came in the
     year (of ,Hajjat-ul-wada' of the Prophet ) and
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! My father has come
     under Allah's obligation of performing Hajj but he
     is a very old man and cannot sit properly on his
     Mount. Will the obligation be fulfilled if I perform
     Hajj on his behalf?" The Prophet replied in the
     affirmative. 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 79: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     Al-Fadl was riding behind the Prophet and a
     woman from the tribe of Khath'am came up.
     Al-Fadl started looking at her and she looked at
     him. The Prophet turned Al-Fadl's face to the
     other side. She said, "My father has come under
     Allah's obligation of performing Hajj but he is a
     very old man and cannot sit properly on his
     Mount. Shall I perform Hajj on his behalf? The
     Prophet replied in the affirmative. That happened
     during Hajjat-ul-wada' of the Prophet . 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 80: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet sent me (to Mina) with the luggage
     from Jam'(i.e. Al-Muzdalifa) at night. 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 81: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     I came riding on my she-ass and had (just) then
     attained the age of puberty. Allah's Apostle was
     praying at Mina. I passed in front of a part of the
     first row and then dismounted from it, and the
     animal started grazing. I aligned with the people
     behind Allah's Apostle (The sub-narrator added
     that happened in Mina during the Prophet's
     Hajjat-ul-wada.) 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 82: 

     Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid: 

     (While in the company of my parents) I was
     made to perform Hajj with Allah's Apostle and I
     was a seven-year-old boy then. (Fatch-Al-Bari,
     p.443, Vol.4) 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 83: 

     Narrated Al-Ju'aid bin 'AbdurRahman: 

     I heard 'Umar bin 'Abdul Azlz telling about
     As-Sa'ib bin Yazid that he had performed Hajj
     (while carried) with the belongings of the Prophet


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 84: 

     Narrated Aisha (mother of the faithful believers): 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shouldn't we
     participate in Holy battles and Jihad along with
     you?" He replied, "The best and the most
     superior Jihad (for women) is Hajj which is
     accepted by Allah." 'Aisha added: Ever since I
     heard that from Allah's Apostle I have
     determined not to miss Hajj. 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 85: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "A woman should not travel
     except with a Dhu-Mahram (her husband or a
     man with whom that woman cannot marry at all
     according to the Islamic Jurisprudence), and no
     man may visit her except in the presence of a
     Dhu-Mahram." A man got up and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I intend to go to such and such
     an army and my wife wants to perform Hajj."
     The Prophet said (to him), "Go along with her (to
     Hajj)." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 86: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     When the Prophet returned after performing his
     Hajj, he asked Um Sinan Al-Ansari, "What did
     forbid you to perform Hajj?" She replied, "Father
     of so-and-so (i.e. her husband) had two camels
     and he performed Hajj on one of them, and the
     second is used for the irrigation of our land." The
     Prophet said (to her), "Perform 'Umra in the
     month of Ramadan, (as it is equivalent to Hajj or
     Hajj with me (in reward)." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 87: 

     Narrated Qaza'a, the slave of Ziyad: Abu Said
     who participated in twelve Ghazawat with the
     Prophet said, "I heard four things from Allah's
     Apostle (or I narrate them from the Prophet )
     which won my admiration and appreciation. They
     are: 

     1. "No lady should travel without her husband or
     without a Dhu-Mahram for a two-days' journey. 

     2. No fasting is permissible on two days of
     'Id-al-Fitr, and 'Id-al-Adha. 

     3. No prayer (may be offered) after two prayers:
     after the 'Asr prayer till the sun set and after the
     morning prayer till the sun rises. 

     4. Not to travel (for visiting) except for three
     mosques: Masjid-al-Haram (in Mecca), my
     Mosque (in Medina), and Masjid-al-Aqsa (in
     Jerusalem)." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 88: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet saw an old man walking, supported
     by his two sons, and asked about him. The
     people informed him that he had vowed to go on
     foot (to the Ka'ba). He said, "Allah is not in need
     of this old man's torturing himself," and ordered
     him to ride. 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 89: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir: 

     My sister vowed to go on foot to the Ka'ba, and
     she asked me to take the verdict of the Prophet
     about it. So, I did and the Prophet said, "She
     should walk and also should ride." 


Volume 3, Book 29, Number 90: 

     Narrated Abu-l-Khair from 'Uqba as above. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 30: 

       Virtues of Madinah 



Volume 3, Book 30, Number 91: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Medina is a sanctuary from
     that place to that. Its trees should not be cut and
     no heresy should be innovated nor any sin should
     be committed in it, and whoever innovates in it an
     heresy or commits sins (bad deeds), then he will
     incur the curse of Allah, the angels, and all the
     people." (See Hadith No. 409, Vol 9). 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 92: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet came to Medina and ordered a
     mosque to be built and said, "O Bani Najjar!
     Suggest to me the price (of your land)." They
     said, "We do not want its price except from
     Allah" (i.e. they wished for a reward from Allah
     for giving up their land freely). So, the Prophet
     ordered the graves of the pagans to be dug out
     and the land to be levelled, and the date-palm
     trees to be cut down. The cut date-palms were
     fixed in the direction of the Qibla of the mosque. 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 93: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "I have made Medina a
     sanctuary between its two (Harrat) mountains."
     The Prophet went to the tribe of Bani Haritha
     and said (to them), "I see that you have gone out
     of the sanctuary," but looking around, he added,
     "No, you are inside the sanctuary." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 94: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     We have nothing except the Book of Allah and
     this written paper from the Prophet (where-in is
     written:) Medina is a sanctuary from the 'Air
     Mountain to such and such a place, and whoever
     innovates in it an heresy or commits a sin, or
     gives shelter to such an innovator in it will incur
     the curse of Allah, the angels, and all the people,
     none of his compulsory or optional good deeds
     of worship will be accepted. And the asylum (of
     protection) granted by any Muslim is to be
     secured (respected) by all the other Muslims;
     and whoever betrays a Muslim in this respect
     incurs the curse of Allah, the angels, and all the
     people, and none of his compulsory or optional
     good deeds of worship will be accepted, and
     whoever (freed slave) befriends (take as
     masters) other than his manumitters without their
     permission incurs the curse of Allah, the angels,
     and all the people, and none of his compulsory or
     optional good deeds of worship will be
     accepted. 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 95: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "I was ordered to migrate
     to a town which will swallow (conquer) other
     towns and is called Yathrib and that is Medina,
     and it turns out (bad) persons as a furnace
     removes the impurities of iron. 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 96: 

     Narrated Abu Humaid: 

     We came with the Prophet from Tabuk, and
     when we reached near Medina, the Prophet said,
     "This is Tabah." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 97: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     If I saw deers grazing in Medina, I would not
     chase them, for Allah's Apostle said, "(Medina)
     is a sanctuary between its two mountains." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 98: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The people will
     leave Medina in spite of the best state it will
     have, and none except the wild birds and the
     beasts of prey will live in it, and the last persons
     who will die will be two shepherds from the tribe
     of Muzaina, who will be driving their sheep
     towards Medina, but will find nobody in it, and
     when they reach the valley of Thaniyat-al-Wada',
     they will fall down on their faces dead." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 99: 

     Narrated Abu Zuhair: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Yemen will be
     conquered and some people will migrate (from
     Medina) and will urge their families, and those
     who will obey them to migrate (to Yemen)
     although Medina will be better for them; if they
     but knew. Sham will also be conquered and
     some people will migrate (from Medina) and will
     urge their families and those who will obey them,
     to migrate (to Sham) although Medina will be
     better for them; if they but knew. 'Iraq will be
     conquered and some people will migrate (from
     Medina) and will urge their families and those
     who will obey them to migrate (to 'Iraq) although
     Medina will be better for them; if they but knew."


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 100: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Verily, Belief returns and
     goes back to Medina as a snake returns and
     goes back to its hole (when in danger)." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 101: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "None plots against
     the people of Medina but that he will be
     dissolved (destroyed) like the salt is dissolved in
     water." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 102: 

     Narrated Usama: 

     Once the Prophet stood at the top of a (looked
     out from upon one) castle amongst the castles (or
     the high buildings) of Medina and said, "Do you
     see what I see? (No doubt) I see the spots
     where afflictions will take place among your
     houses (and these afflictions will be) as numerous
     as the spots where rain-drops fall." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 103: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     The Prophet said, "The terror caused by
     Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal will not enter Medina and at
     that time Medina will have seven gates and there
     will be two angels at each gate guarding them." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 104: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There are angels guarding
     the entrances (or roads) of Medina, neither
     plague nor Ad-Dajjal will be able to enter it." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 105: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "There will be no town which
     Ad-Dajjal will not enter except Mecca and
     Medina, and there will be no entrance (road) (of
     both Mecca and Medina) but the angels will be
     standing in rows guarding it against him, and then
     Medina will shake with its inhabitants thrice (i.e.
     three earth-quakes will take place) and Allah will
     expel all the nonbelievers and the hypocrites from
     it." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 106: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle told us a long narrative about
     Ad-Dajjal, and among the many things he
     mentioned, was his saying, "Ad-Dajjal will come
     and it will be forbidden for him to pass through
     the entrances of Medina. He will land in some of
     the salty barren areas (outside) Medina; on that
     day the best man or one of the best men will
     come up to him and say, 'I testify that you are the
     same Dajjal whose description was given to us
     by Allah's Apostle .' Ad-Dajjal will say to the
     people, 'If I kill this man and bring him back to
     life again, will you doubt my claim?' They will
     say, 'No.' Then Ad-Dajjal will kill that man and
     bring him back to life. That man will say, 'Now I
     know your reality better than before.' Ad-Dajjal
     will say, 'I want to kill him but I cannot.' " 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 107: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     A bedouin came to the Prophet and gave a
     pledge of allegiance for embracing Islam. The
     next day he came with fever and said (to the
     Prophet ), "Please cancel my pledge (of
     embracing Islam and of emigrating to Medina)."
     The Prophet refused (that request) three times
     and said, "Medina is like a furnace, it expels out
     the impurities (bad persons) and selects the good
     ones and makes them perfect." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 108: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Thabit: 

     When the Prophet went out for (the battle of)
     Uhud, some of his companions (hypocrites)
     returned (home). A party of the believers
     remarked that they would kill those (hypocrites)
     who had returned, but another party said that
     they would not kill them. So, this Divine
     Inspiration was revealed: "Then what is the
     matter with you that you are divided into two
     parties concerning the hypocrites." (4.88) The
     Prophet said, "Medina expels the bad persons
     from it, as fire expels the impurities of iron." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 109: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "O Allah! Bestow on Medina
     twice the blessings You bestowed on Mecca." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 110: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Whenever the Prophet returned from a journey
     and observed the walls of Medina, he would
     make his Mount go fast, and if he was on an
     animal (i.e. a horse), he would make it gallop
     because of his love for Medina. 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 111: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     (The people of) Bani Salama intended to shift
     near the mosque (of the Prophet) but Allah's
     Apostle disliked to see Medina vacated and said,
     "O the people of Bani Salama! Don't you think
     that you will be rewarded for your footsteps
     which you take towards the mosque?" So, they
     stayed at their old places. 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 112: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "There
     is a garden from the gardens of Paradise
     between my house and my pulpit, and my pulpit
     is on my Lake Fount (Al-Kauthar)." 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 113: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When Allah's Apostle reached Medina, Abu
     Bakr and Bilal became ill. When Abu Bakr's
     fever got worse, he would recite (this poetic
     verse): "Everybody is staying alive with his
     People, yet Death is nearer to him than His shoe
     laces." And Bilal, when his fever deserted him,
     would recite: "Would that I could stay overnight
     in A valley wherein I would be Surrounded by
     Idhkhir and Jalil (kinds of good-smelling grass).
     Would that one day I could Drink the water of
     the Majanna, and Would that (The two
     mountains) Shama and Tafil would appear to
     me!" The Prophet said, "O Allah! Curse Shaiba
     bin Rabi'a and 'Utba bin Rabi'a and Umaiya bin
     Khalaf as they turned us out of our land to the
     land of epidemics." Allah's Apostle then said, "O
     Allah! Make us love Medina as we love Mecca
     or even more than that. O Allah! Give blessings
     in our Sa and our Mudd (measures symbolizing
     food) and make the climate of Medina suitable
     for us, and divert its fever towards Aljuhfa."
     Aisha added: When we reached Medina, it was
     the most unhealthy of Allah's lands, and the valley
     of Bathan (the valley of Medina) used to flow
     with impure colored water. 


Volume 3, Book 30, Number 114: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Aslam from his father: 

     Umar said, O Allah! Grant me martyrdom in
     Your cause, and let my death be in the city of
     Your Apostle." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 31: 

                 Fasting 



Volume 3, Book 31, Number 115: 

     Narrated Talha bin 'Ubaid-Ullah: 

     A bedouin with unkempt hair came to Allah's
     Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Inform me
     what Allah has made compulsory for me as
     regards the prayers." He replied: "You have to
     offer perfectly the five compulsory prayers in a
     day and night (24 hours), unless you want to
     pray Nawafil." The bedouin further asked,
     "Inform me what Allah has made compulsory for
     me as regards fasting." He replied, "You have to
     fast during the whole month of Ramadan, unless
     you want to fast more as Nawafil." The bedouin
     further asked, "Tell me how much Zakat Allah
     has enjoined on me." Thus, Allah's Apostle
     informed him about all the rules (i.e.
     fundamentals) of Islam. The bedouin then said,
     "By Him Who has honored you, I will neither
     perform any Nawafil nor will I decrease what
     Allah has enjoined on me. Allah's Apostle said,
     "If he is saying the truth, he will succeed (or he
     will be granted Paradise)." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 116: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet observed the fast on the 10th of
     Muharram ('Ashura), and ordered (Muslims) to
     fast on that day, but when the fasting of the
     month of Ramadan was prescribed, the fasting of
     the 'Ashura' was abandoned. 'Abdullah did not
     use to fast on that day unless it coincided with his
     routine fasting by chance. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 117: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (The tribe of) Quraish used to fast on the day of
     Ashura' in the Pre-lslamic period, and then
     Allah's Apostle ordered (Muslims) to fast on it till
     the fasting in the month of Ramadan was
     prescribed; whereupon the Prophet said, "He
     who wants to fast (on 'Ashura') may fast, and he
     who does not want to fast may not fast." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 118: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Fasting is a shield (or a
     screen or a shelter). So, the person observing
     fasting should avoid sexual relation with his wife
     and should not behave foolishly and impudently,
     and if somebody fights with him or abuses him,
     he should tell him twice, 'I am fasting." The
     Prophet added, "By Him in Whose Hands my
     soul is, the smell coming out from the mouth of a
     fasting person is better in the sight of Allah than
     the smell of musk. (Allah says about the fasting
     person), 'He has left his food, drink and desires
     for My sake. The fast is for Me. So I will reward
     (the fasting person) for it and the reward of good
     deeds is multiplied ten times." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 119: 

     Narrated Abu Wail from Hudhaifa: 

     Umar asked the people, "Who remembers the
     narration of the Prophet about the affliction?"
     Hudhaifa said, "I heard the Prophet saying, 'The
     affliction of a person in his property, family and
     neighbors is expiated by his prayers, fasting, and
     giving in charity." 'Umar said, "I do not ask about
     that, but I ask about those afflictions which will
     spread like the waves of the sea." Hudhaifa
     replied, "There is a closed gate in front of those
     afflictions." 'Umar asked, "Will that gate be
     opened or broken?" He replied, "It will be
     broken." 'Umar said, "Then the gate will not be
     closed again till the Day of Resurrection." We
     said to Masruq, "Would you ask Hudhaifa
     whether 'Umar knew what that gate
     symbolized?" He asked him and he replied "He
     ('Umar) knew it as one knows that there will be
     night before tomorrow, morning. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 120: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     The Prophet said, "There is a gate in Paradise
     called Ar-Raiyan, and those who observe fasts
     will enter through it on the Day of Resurrection
     and none except them will enter through it. It will
     be said, 'Where are those who used to observe
     fasts?' They will get up, and none except them
     will enter through it. After their entry the gate will
     be closed and nobody will enter through it." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 121: 

     'Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever gives two kinds
     (of things or property) in charity for Allah's
     Cause, will be called from the gates of Paradise
     and will be addressed, 'O slaves of Allah! Here
     is prosperity.' So, whoever was amongst the
     people who used to offer their prayers, will be
     called from the gate of the prayer; and whoever
     was amongst the people who used to participate
     in Jihad, will be called from the gate of Jihad; and
     whoever was amongst those who used to
     observe fasts, will be called from the gate of
     Ar-Raiyan; whoever was amongst those who
     used to give in charity, will be called from the
     gate of charity." Abu Bakr said, "Let my parents
     be sacrificed for you, O Allah's Apostle! No
     distress or need will befall him who will be called
     from those gates. Will there be any one who will
     be called from all these gates?" The Prophet
     replied, "Yes, and I hope you will be one of
     them." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 122: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When Ramadan begins,
     the gates of Paradise are opened." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 123: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When the month of
     Ramadan starts, the gates of the heaven are
     opened and the gates of Hell are closed and the
     devils are chained." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 124: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: I heard Allah's Apostle
     saying, "When you see the crescent (of the month
     of Ramadan), start fasting, and when you see the
     crescent (of the month of Shawwal), stop fasting;
     and if the sky is overcast (and you can't see It)
     then regard the crescent (month) of Ramadan (as
     of 30 days)". 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 125: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever established prayers
     on the night of Qadr out of sincere faith and
     hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his
     previous sins will be forgiven; and whoever fasts
     in the month of Ramadan out of sincere faith, and
     hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his
     previous sins will be forgiven." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 126: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet was the most generous amongst the
     people, and he used to be more so in the month
     of Ramadan when Gabriel visited him, and
     Gabriel used to meet him on every night of
     Ramadan till the end of the month. The Prophet
     used to recite the Holy Qur'an to Gabriel, and
     when Gabriel met him, he used to be more
     generous than a fast wind (which causes rain and
     welfare). 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 127: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever does not give up
     forged speech and evil actions, Allah is not in
     need of his leaving his food and drink (i.e. Allah
     will not accept his fasting.)" 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 128: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Allah said, 'All the deeds
     of Adam's sons (people) are for them, except
     fasting which is for Me, and I will give the reward
     for it.' Fasting is a shield or protection from the
     fire and from committing sins. If one of you is
     fasting, he should avoid sexual relation with his
     wife and quarreling, and if somebody should fight
     or quarrel with him, he should say, 'I am fasting.'
     By Him in Whose Hands my soul is' The
     unpleasant smell coming out from the mouth of a
     fasting person is better in the sight of Allah than
     the smell of musk. There are two pleasures for
     the fasting person, one at the time of breaking his
     fast, and the other at the time when he will meet
     his Lord; then he will be pleased because of his
     fasting." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 129: 

     Narrated 'Alqama: While I was walking with
     'Abdullah he said, "We were in the company of
     the Prophet and he said, 'He who can afford to
     marry should marry, because it will help him
     refrain from looking at other women, and save
     his private parts from looking at other women,
     and save his private parts from committing illegal
     sexual relation; and he who cannot afford to
     marry is advised to fast, as fasting will diminish
     his sexual power." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 130: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle mentioned Ramadan and said,
     "Do not fast unless you see the crescent (of
     Ramadan), and do not give up fasting till you see
     the crescent (of Shawwal), but if the sky is
     overcast (if you cannot see it), then act on
     estimation (i.e. count Sha'ban as 30 days)." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 131: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The month (can be) 29
     nights (i.e. days), and do not fast till you see the
     moon, and if the sky is overcast, then complete
     Sha'ban as thirty days." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 132: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "The month is like this and
     this," (at the same time he showed the fingers of
     both his hands thrice) and left out one thumb on
     the third time. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 133: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet or Abu-l-Qasim said, "Start fasting
     on seeing the crescent (of Ramadan), and give up
     fasting on seeing the crescent (of Shawwal), and
     if the sky is overcast (and you cannot see it),
     complete thirty days of Sha'ban." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 134: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     The Prophet vowed to keep aloof from his wives
     for a period of one month, and after the
     completion of 29 days he went either in the
     morning or in the afternoon to his wives.
     Someone said to him "You vowed that you
     would not go to your wives for one month." He
     replied, "The month is of 29 days." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 135: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle vowed to keep aloof from his
     wives for one month, and he had dislocation of
     his leg. So, he stayed in a Mashruba for 29 nights
     and then came down. Some people said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! You vowed to stay aloof for one
     month," He replied, "The month is of 29 days." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 136: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     The Prophet said, "The two months of 'Id i.e.
     Ramadan and Dhul-Hijja, do not decrease (in
     superiority)." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 137: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "We are an illiterate nation; we
     neither write, nor know accounts. The month is
     like this and this, i.e. sometimes of 29 days and
     sometimes of thirty days." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 138: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "None of you should fast a
     day or two before the month of Ramadan unless
     he has the habit of fasting (Nawafil) (and if his
     fasting coincides with that day) then he can fast
     that day." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 139: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     It was the custom among the companions of
     Muhammad that if any of them was fasting and
     the food was presented (for breaking his fast),
     but he slept before eating, he would not eat that
     night and the following day till sunset. 

     Qais bin Sirma-al-Ansari was fasting and came
     to his wife at the time of Iftar (breaking one's
     fast) and asked her whether she had anything to
     eat. She replied, "No, but I would go and bring
     some for you." He used to do hard work during
     the day, so he was overwhelmed by sleep and
     slept. When his wife came and saw him, she said,
     "Disappointment for you." When it was midday
     on the following day, he fainted and the Prophet
     was informed about the whole matter and the
     following verses were revealed: "You are
     permitted To go to your wives (for sexual
     relation) At the night of fasting." So, they were
     overjoyed by it. And then Allah also revealed:
     "And eat and drink Until the white thread Of
     dawn appears to you Distinct from the black
     thread (of the night)." (2.187) 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 140: 

     Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim: 

     When the above verses were revealed: 'Until the
     white thread appears to you, distinct from the
     black thread,' I took two (hair) strings, one black
     and the other white, and kept them under my
     pillow and went on looking at them throughout
     the night but could not make anything out of it.
     So, the next morning I went to Allah's Apostle
     and told him the whole story. He explained to
     me, "That verse means the darkness of the night
     and the whiteness of the dawn." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 141: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Saud: 

     When the following verses were revealed: 'Eat
     and drink until the white thread appears to you,
     distinct from the black thread' and of dawn was
     not revealed, some people who intended to fast,
     tied black and white threads to their legs and
     went on eating till they differentiated between the
     two. Allah then revealed the words, 'of dawn',
     and it became clear that meant night and day. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 142: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Bilal used to pronounce the Adhan at night, so
     Allah's Apostle? said, "Carry on taking your
     meals (eat and drink) till Ibn Um Maktum
     pronounces the Adhan, for he does not
     pronounce it till it is dawn. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 143: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     I used to take my Suhur meals with my family
     and then hurry up for presenting myself for the
     (Fajr) prayer with Allah's Apostle. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 144: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Zaid bin Thabit said, "We took the Suhur with
     the Prophet . Then he stood for the prayer." I
     asked, "What was the interval between the Suhur
     and the Adhan?" He replied, "The interval was
     sufficient to recite fifty verses of the Quran." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 145: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet fasted for days continuously; the
     people also did the same but it was difficult for
     them. So, the Prophet forbade them (to fast
     continuously for more than one day). They slid,
     "But you fast without break (no food was taken
     in the evening or in the morning)." The Prophet
     replied, "I am not like you, for I am provided
     with food and drink (by Allah)." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 146: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Take Suhur as there is a
     blessing in it." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 147: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     Once the Prophet ordered a person on 'Ashura'
     (the tenth of Muharram) to announce, "Whoever
     has eaten, should not eat any more, but fast, and
     who has not eaten should not eat, but complete
     his fast (till the end of the day). 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 148: 

     Narrated 'Aisha and Um Salama: 

     At times Allah's Apostle used to get up in the
     morning in the state of Janaba after having sexual
     relations with his wives. He would then take a
     bath and fast. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 149: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to kiss and embrace (his
     wives) while he was fasting, and he had more
     power to control his desires than any of you.
     Said Jabir, "The person who gets discharge after
     casting a look (on his wife) should complete his
     fast." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 150: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     Aisha said, "Allah's Apostle used to kiss some of
     his wives while he was fasting," and then she
     smiled. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 151: 

     Narrated Zainab: 

     (daughter of Um Salama) that her mother said,
     "While I was (lying) with Allah's Apostle
     underneath a woolen sheet, I got the
     menstruation, and then slipped away and put on
     the clothes (which I used to wear) in menses. He
     asked, "What is the matter? Did you get your
     menses?" I replied in the affirmative and then
     entered underneath that woolen sheet. I and
     Allah's Apostle used to take a bath from one
     water pot and he used to kiss me while he was
     fasting." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 152: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (At times) in Ramadan the Prophet used to take
     a bath in the morning not because of a wet dream
     and would continue his fast. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 153: 

     Narrated Abu Bakr bin 'Abdur-Rahman: 

     My father and I went to 'Aisha and she said, "I
     testify that Allah's Apostle at times used to get up
     in the morning in a state of Janaba from sexual
     intercourse, not from a wet dream and then he
     would fast that day." Then he went to Um
     Salama and she also narrated a similar thing. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 154: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "If somebody eats or drinks
     forgetfully then he should complete his fast, for
     what he has eaten or drunk, has been given to
     him by Allah." Narrated 'Amir bin Rabi'a, "I saw
     the Prophet cleaning his teeth with Siwak while
     he was fasting so many times as I can't count."
     And narrated Abu Huraira, "The Prophet said,
     'But for my fear that it would be hard for my
     followers, I would have ordered them to clean
     their teeth with Siwak on every performance of
     ablution." The same is narrated by Jabir and Zaid
     bin Khalid from the Prophet who did not
     differentiate between a fasting and a nonfasting
     person in this respect (using Siwak). 

     Aisha said, "The Prophet said, "It (i.e. Siwak) is
     a purification for the mouth and it is a way of
     seeking Allah's pleasures." Ata' and Qatada said,
     "There is no harm in swallowing the resultant
     saliva." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 155: 

     Narrated Humran: 

     I saw 'Uthman performing ablution; he washed
     his hands thrice, rinsed his mouth and then
     washed his nose, by putting water in it and then
     blowing it out, and washed his face thrice, and
     then washed his right forearm up to the elbow
     thrice, and then the left-forearm up to the elbow
     thrice, then smeared his head with water, washed
     his right foot thrice, and then his left foot thrice
     and said, "I saw Allah's Apostle performing
     ablution similar to my present ablution, and then
     he said, 'Whoever performs ablution like my
     present ablution and then offers two Rakat in
     which he does not think of worldly things, all his
     previous sins will be forgiven." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 156: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     A man came to the Prophet and said that he had
     been burnt (ruined). The Prophet asked him what
     was the matter. He replied, "I had sexual
     intercourse with my wife in Ramadan (while I
     was fasting)." Then a basket full of dates was
     brought to the Prophet and he asked, "Where is
     the burnt (ruined) man?" He replied, "I am
     present." The Prophet told him to give that
     basket in charity (as expiation). 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 157: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     While we were sitting with the Prophet a man
     came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have been
     ruined." Allah's Apostle asked what was the
     matter with him. He replied "I had sexual
     intercourse with my wife while I was fasting."
     Allah's Apostle asked him, "Can you afford to
     manumit a slave?" He replied in the negative.
     Allah's Apostle asked him, "Can you fast for two
     successive months?" He replied in the negative.
     The Prophet asked him, "Can you afford to feed
     sixty poor persons?" He replied in the negative.
     The Prophet kept silent and while we were in
     that state, a big basket full of dates was brought
     to the Prophet . He asked, "Where is the
     questioner?" He replied, "I (am here)." The
     Prophet said (to him), "Take this (basket of
     dates) and give it in charity." The man said,
     "Should I give it to a person poorer than I? By
     Allah; there is no family between its (i.e.
     Medina's) two mountains who are poorer than I."
     The Prophet smiled till his pre-molar teeth
     became visible and then said, 'Feed your family
     with it." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 158: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man came to the Prophet and said, "I had
     sexual intercourse with my wife on Ramadan
     (while fasting)." The Prophet asked him, "Can
     you afford to manumit a slave?" He replied in the
     negative. The Prophet asked him, "Can you fast
     for two successive months?" He replied in the
     negative. He asked him, "Can you afford to feed
     sixty poor persons?" He replied in the negative.
     (Abu Huraira added): Then a basket full of dates
     was brought to the Prophet and he said (to that
     man), "Feed (poor people) with this by way of
     atonement." He said, "(Should I feed it) to
     poorer people than we? There is no poorer
     house than ours between its (Medina's)
     mountains." The Prophet said, "Then feed your
     family with it." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 159: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet was cupped while he was in the
     state of lhram, and also while he was observing a
     fast. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 160: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet was cupped while he was fasting. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 161: 

     Narrated Thabit Al-Bunani: 

     Anas bin Malik was asked whether they disliked
     the cupping for a fasting person. He replied in the
     negative and said, "Only if it causes weakness." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 162: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa: 

     We were in the company of Allah's Apostle on a
     journey. He said to a man, "Get down and mix
     Sawiq (powdered barley) with water for me."
     The man said, "The sun (has not set yet), O
     Allah's Apostle." The Prophet again said to him,
     "Get down and mix Sawiq with water for me."
     The man again said, "O Allah's Apostle! The
     sun!" The Prophet said to him (for the third time)
     "Get down and mix Sawiq with water for me."
     The man dismounted and mixed Sawiq with
     water for him. The Prophet drank it and then
     beckoned with his hand (towards the East) and
     said, "When you see the night falling from this
     side, then a fasting person should break his fast." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 163: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Hamza bin 'Amr Al-Aslami said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I fast continuously." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 164: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Hamza bin 'Amr
     Al-Aslami asked the Prophet, "Should I fast
     while traveling?" The Prophet replied, "You may
     fast if you wish, and you may not fast if you
     wish." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 165: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle set out for Mecca in Ramadan
     and he fasted, and when he reached Al-Kadid,
     he broke his fast and the people (with him) broke
     their fast too. (Abu 'Abdullah said, "Al-Kadid is
     a land covered with water between Usfan and
     Qudaid.") 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 166: 

     Narrated Abu Ad-Darda: 

     We set out with Allah's Apostle on one of his
     journeys on a very hot day, and it was so hot that
     one had to put his hand over his head because of
     the severity of heat. None of us was fasting
     except the Prophet and Ibn Rawaha. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 167: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle was on a journey and saw a
     crowd of people, and a man was being shaded
     (by them). He asked, "What is the matter?" They
     said, "He (the man) is fasting." The Prophet said,
     "It is not righteousness that you fast on a
     journey." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 168: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     We used to travel with the Prophet and neither
     did the fasting persons criticize those who were
     not fasting, nor did those who were not fasting
     criticize the fasting ones. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 169: 

     Narrated Tawus: 

     Ibn 'Abbas said, "Allah's Apostle set out from
     Medina to Mecca and he fasted till he reached
     'Usfan, where he asked for water and raised his
     hand to let the people see him, and then broke
     the fast, and did not fast after that till he reached
     Mecca, and that happened in Ramadan." Ibn
     'Abbas used to say, "Allah's Apostle (sometimes)
     fasted and (sometimes) did not fast during the
     journeys so whoever wished to fast could fast,
     and whoever wished not to fast, could do so." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 170: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar recited the verse: "They had a choice
     either to fast or to feed a poor person for every
     day, and said that the order of this Verse was
     cancelled. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 171: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Sometimes I missed some days of Ramadan, but
     could not fast in lieu of them except in the month
     of Sha'ban." Said Yahya, a sub-narrator, "She
     used to be busy serving the Prophet ." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 172: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     The Prophet said, "Isn't it true that a woman
     does not pray and does not fast on menstruating?
     And that is the defect (a loss) in her religion." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 173: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever died and he
     ought to have fasted (the missed days of
     Ramadan) then his guardians must fast on his
     behalf." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 174: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     A man came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! My mother died and she ought to have
     fasted one month (for her missed Ramadan).
     Shall I fast on her behalf?" The Prophet replied in
     the affirmative and said, "Allah's debts have more
     right to be paid." In another narration a woman is
     reported to have said, "My sister died..." 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: A woman said to the
     Prophet "My mother died and she had vowed to
     fast but she didn't fast." In another narration Ibn
     'Abbas is reported to have said, "A woman said
     to the Prophet, "My mother died while she ought
     to have fasted for fifteen days." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 175: 

     Narrated Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When night falls from this
     side and the day vanishes from this side and the
     sun sets, then the fasting person should break his
     fast." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 176: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Abi Aufa: 

     We were in the company of the Prophet on a
     journey and he was fasting, and when the sun set,
     he addressed somebody, "O so-and-so, get up
     and mix Sawiq with water for us." He replied, "O
     Allah's Apostle! (Will you wait) till it is evening?"
     The Prophet said, "Get down and mix Sawiq
     with water for us." He replied, "O Allah's
     Apostle! (If you wait) till it is evening." The
     Prophet said again, "Get down and mix Sawiq
     with water for us." He replied, "It is still
     daytime."(1) The Prophet said again, "Get down
     and mix Sawiq with water for us." He got down
     and mixed Sawiq for them. The Prophet drank it
     and then said, "When you see night falling from
     this side, the fasting person should break his
     fast." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 177: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa" 

     We were traveling with Allah's Apostle and he
     was fasting, and when the sun set, he said to
     (someone), "Get down and mix Sawiq with
     water for us." He replied, "O Allah's Apostle!
     (Will you wait) till it is evening?" The Prophet
     again said, "Get down and mix Sawiq with water
     for us." He replied, "O Allah's Apostle! It is still
     daytime." The Prophet said again, "Get down
     and mix Sawiq with water for us." So, he got
     down and carried out that order. The Prophet
     then said, "When you see night falling from this
     side, the fasting person should break his fast,"
     and he beckoned with his finger towards the
     east. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 178: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The people will remain on
     the right path as long as they hasten the breaking
     of the fast." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 179: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa: 

     I was with the Prophet on a journey, and he
     observed the fast till evening. The Prophet said to
     a man, "Get down and mix Sawiq with water for
     me." He replied, "Will you wait till it is evening?"
     The Prophet said, "Get down and mix Sawiq
     with water for me; when you see night falling
     from this side, the fasting person should break his
     fast." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 180: 

     Narrated Abu Usama from Hisham bin 'Ursa
     from Fatima: 

     Asma bint Abi Bakr said, "We broke our fast
     during the lifetime of the Prophet on a cloudy day
     and then the sun appeared." Hisham was asked,
     "Were they ordered to fast in lieu of that day?"
     He replied, "It had to be made up for." Ma'mar
     said, "I heard Hisham saying, "I don't know
     whether they fasted in lieu of that day or not." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 181: 

     Narrated Ar-Rubi' bint Mu'awadh: 

     "The Prophet sent a messenger to the village of
     the Ansar in the morning of the day of 'Ashura'
     (10th of Muharram) to announce: 'Whoever has
     eaten something should not eat but complete the
     fast, and whoever is observing the fast should
     complete it.' "She further said, "Since then we
     used to fast on that day regularly and also make
     our boys fast. We used to make toys of wool for
     the boys and if anyone of them cried for, he was
     given those toys till it was the time of the
     breaking of the fast." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 182: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Do not practice Al-Wisal
     (fasting continuously without breaking one's fast
     in the evening or eating before the following
     dawn)." The people said to the Prophet, "But
     you practice Al-Wisal?" The Prophet replied, "I
     am not like any of you, for I am given food and
     drink (by Allah) during the night." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 183: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Wisal. The people
     said (to him), "But you practice it?" He said, "I
     am not like you, for I am given food and drink by
     Allah." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 184: 

     'Narrated Abu Sa'id: 

     That he had heard the Prophet saying, "Do not
     fast continuously (practise Al-Wisal), and if you
     intend to lengthen your fast, then carry it on only
     till the Suhur (before the following dawn)." The
     people said to him, "But you practice (Al-Wisal),
     O Allah's Apostle!" He replied, "I am not similar
     to you, for during my sleep I have One Who
     makes me eat and drink." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 185: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Wisal out of mercy to
     them. They said to him, "But you practice
     Al-Wisal?" He said, "I am not similar to you, for
     my Lord gives me food and drink. " 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 186: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Wisal in fasting. So,
     one of the Muslims said to him, "But you practice
     Al-Wisal. O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet
     replied, "Who amongst you is similar to me? I am
     given food and drink during my sleep by my
     Lord." So, when the people refused to stop
     Al-Wisal (fasting continuously), the Prophet
     fasted day and night continuously along with them
     for a day and then another day and then they saw
     the crescent moon (of the month of Shawwal).
     The Prophet said to them (angrily), "If It (the
     crescent) had not appeared, I would have made
     you fast for a longer period." That was as a
     punishment for them when they refused to stop
     (practising Al-Wisal). 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 187: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said twice, "(O you people) Be
     cautious! Do not practice Al-Wisal." The people
     said to him, "But you practice Al-Wisal?" The
     Prophet replied, "My Lord gives me food and
     drink during my sleep. Do that much of deeds
     which is within your ability." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 188: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Do not fast continuously
     day and night (practise Al-Wisal) and if anyone
     of you intends to fast continuously day and night,
     he should continue till the Suhur time." They said,
     "But you practise Al-Wisal, O Allah's Apostle!"
     The Prophet said, "I am not similar to you;.
     during my sleep I have One Who makes me eat
     and drink." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 189: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     The Prophet made a bond of brotherhood
     between Salman and Abu Ad-Darda.' Salman
     paid a visit to Abu Ad-Darda' and found Um
     Ad-Darda' dressed in shabby clothes and asked
     her why she was in that state. She replied, "Your
     brother Abu Ad-Darda' is not interested in (the
     luxuries of) this world." In the meantime Abu
     Ad-Darda' came and prepared a meal for
     Salman. Salman requested Abu Ad-Darda' to
     eat (with him), but Abu Ad-Darda' said, "I am
     fasting." Salman said, "I am not going to eat
     unless you eat." So, Abu Ad-Darda' ate(with
     Salman). When it was night and (a part of the
     night passed), Abu Ad-Darda' got up (to offer
     the night prayer), but Salman told him to sleep
     and Abu Ad-Darda' slept. After sometime Abu
     Ad-Darda' again got up but Salman told him to
     sleep. When it was the last hours of the night,
     Salman told him to get up then, and both of them
     offered the prayer. Salman told Abu Ad-Darda',
     "Your Lord has a right on you, your soul has a
     right on you, and your family has a right on you;
     so you should give the rights of all those who has
     a right on you." Abu Ad-Darda' came to the
     Prophet and narrated the whole story. The
     Prophet said, "Salman has spoken the truth." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 190: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to fast till one would say
     that he would never stop fasting, and he would
     abandon fasting till one would say that he would
     never fast. I never saw Allah's Apostle fasting for
     a whole month except the month of Ramadan,
     and did not see him fasting in any month more
     than in the month of Sha'ban. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 191: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet never fasted in any month more than
     in the month of Sha'ban. He used to say, "Do
     those deeds which you can do easily, as Allah
     will not get tired (of giving rewards) till you get
     bored and tired (of performing religious deeds)."
     The most beloved prayer to the Prophet was the
     one that was done regularly (throughout the life)
     even if it were little. And whenever the Prophet
     offered a prayer he used to offer it regularly . 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 192: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet never fasted a full month except the
     month of Ramadan, and he used to fast till one
     could say, "By Allah, he will never stop fasting,"
     and he would abandon fasting till one would say,
     "By Allah, he will never fast." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 193: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle used to leave fasting in a certain
     month till we thought that he would not fast in
     that month, and he used to fast in another month
     till we thought he would not stop fasting at all in
     that month. And if one wanted to see him praying
     at night, one could see him (in that condition),
     and if one wanted to see him sleeping at night,
     one could see him (in that condition) too. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 194: 

     Narrated Humaid: 

     I asked Anas about the fasting of the Prophet.
     He said "Whenever I liked to see the Prophet
     fasting in any month, I could see that, and
     whenever I liked to see him not fasting, I could
     see that too, and if I liked to see him praying in
     any night, I could see that, and if I liked to see
     him sleeping, I could see that, too." Anas further
     said, "I never touched silk or velvet softer than
     the hand of Allah's Apostle and never smelled
     musk or perfumed smoke more pleasant than the
     smell of Allah's Apostle." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 195: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As: 

     "Once Allah's Apostle came to me," and then he
     narrated the whole narration, i.e. your guest has a
     right on you, and your wife has a right on you. I
     then asked about the fasting of David. The
     Prophet replied, "Half of the year," (i.e. he used
     to fast on every alternate day). 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 196: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As: 

     Allah's Apostle said to me, "O 'Abdullah! Have I
     not been informed that you fast during the day
     and offer prayers all the night." 'Abdullah replied,
     "Yes, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet said,
     "Don't do that; fast for few days and then give it
     up for few days, offer prayers and also sleep at
     night, as your body has a right on you, and your
     wife has a right on you, and your guest has a right
     on you. And it is sufficient for you to fast three
     days in a month, as the reward of a good deed is
     multiplied ten times, so it will be like fasting
     throughout the year." I insisted (on fasting) and
     so I was given a hard instruction. I said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I have power." The Prophet
     said, "Fast like the fasting of the Prophet David
     and do not fast more than that." I said, "How
     was the fasting of the Prophet of Allah, David?"
     He said, "Half of the year," (i.e. he used to fast
     on every alternate day). 

     Afterwards when 'Abdullah became old, he used
     to say, "It would have been better for me if I had
     accepted the permission of the Prophet (which
     he gave me i.e. to fast only three days a month)." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 197: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     Allah's Apostle was informed that I had taken an
     oath to fast daily and to pray (every night) all the
     night throughout my life (so Allah's Apostle came
     to me and asked whether it was correct): I
     replied, "Let my parents be sacrificed for you! I
     said so." The Prophet said, "You can not do that.
     So, fast for few days and give it up for few days,
     r ray and sleep. Fast three days a month as the
     reward of good deeds is multiplied ten times and
     that will be equal to one year of fasting." I
     replied, "I can do better than that." The Prophet
     said to me, "Fast one day and give up fasting for
     a day and that is the fasting of Prophet David and
     that is the best fasting." I said, "I have the power
     to fast better (more) than that." The Prophet said,
     "There is no better fasting than that." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 198: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     The news of my daily fasting and praying every
     night throughout the night reached the Prophet.
     So he sent for me or I met him, and he said, "I
     have been informed that you fast everyday and
     pray every night (all the night). Fast (for some
     days) and give up fasting (for some days); pray
     and sleep, for your eyes have a right on you, and
     your body and your family (i.e. wife) have a right
     on you." I replied, "I have more power than that
     (fasting)." The Prophet said, "Then fast like the
     fasts of (the Prophet) David". I said, "How?" He
     replied, "He used to fast on alternate days, and
     he used not to flee on meeting the enemy." I said,
     "From where can I get that chance?" ('Ata' said,
     "I do not know how the expression of fasting
     daily throughout the life occurred.") So, the
     Prophet said, twice, "Whoever fasts daily
     throughout his life is just as the one who does not
     fast at all." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 199: 

     Narrated Mujahid from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     The Prophet said (to 'Abdullah), "Fast three days
     a month." 'Abdullah said, (to the Prophet) "I am
     able to fast more than that." They kept on arguing
     on this matter till the Prophet said, "Fast on
     alternate days, and recite the whole Qur'an once
     a month." 'Abdullah said, "I can recite more (in a
     month)," and the argument went on till the
     Prophet said, "Recite the Qur'an once each three
     days." (i.e. you must not recite the whole Qur'an
     in less than three days). 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 200: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As: 

     The Prophet said to me, "You fast daily all the
     year and pray every night all the night?" I replied
     in the affirmative. The Prophet said, "If you keep
     on doing this, your eyes will become weak and
     your body will get tired. He who fasts all the year
     is as he who did not fast at all. The fasting of
     three days (a month) will be equal to the tasting
     of the whole year." I replied, "I have the power
     for more than this." The Prophet said, "Then fast
     like the fasting of David who used to fast on
     alternate days and would never flee from the
     battle field, on meeting the enemy. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 201: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     Allah's Apostle was informed about my fasts,
     and he came to me and I spread for him a leather
     cushion stuffed with palm fires, but he sat on the
     ground and the cushion remained between me
     and him, and then he said, "Isn't it sufficient for
     you to fast three days a month?" I replied, "O
     Allah's Apostle! (I can fast more)." He said,
     "Five?" I replied, "O Allah's Apostle! (I can fast
     more)." He said, "Seven?" I replied, "O Allah's
     Apostle! (I can fast more)." He said, "Nine (days
     per month)?" I replied, "O Allah's Apostle! (I can
     fast more)" He said, "Eleven (days per month)?"
     And then the Prophet said, "There is no fast
     superior to that of the Prophet David it was for
     half of the year. So, fast on alternate days." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 202: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     My friend (the Prophet ) advised me to observe
     three things: 

     (1) to fast three days a month; 

     (2) to pray two Rakat of Duha prayer (fore-noon
     prayer); and 

     (3) to pray Witr before sleeping. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 203: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet paid a visit to Um-Sulaim and she
     placed before him dates and ghee. The Prophet
     said, "Replace the ghee and dates in their
     respective containers for I am fasting." Then he
     stood somewhere in her house and offered an
     optional prayer and then he invoked good on
     Um-Sulaim and her family. Then Um-Sulaim
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have a special request
     (today)." He said, "What is it?" She replied,
     "(Please invoke for) your servant Anas." So
     Allah's Apostle did not leave anything good in the
     world or the Hereafter which he did not invoke
     (Allah to bestow) on me and said, "O Allah!
     Give him (i.e. Anas) property and children and
     bless him." Thus I am one of the richest among
     the Ansar and my daughter Umaina told me that
     when A-Hajjaj came to Basra, more than 120 of
     my offspring had been buried. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 204: 

     Narrated Mutarrif from 'Imran Ibn Husain: 

     That the Prophet asked him (Imran) or asked a
     man and Imran was listening, "O Abu so-and-so!
     Have you fasted the last days of this month?"
     (The narrator thought that he said, "the month of
     Ramadan"). The man replied, "No, O Allah's
     Apostle!" The Prophet said to him, "When you
     finish your fasting (of Ramadan) fast two days (in
     Shawwal)." Through another series of narrators
     'Imran said, "The Prophet said, '(Have you
     fasted) the last days of Sha'ban?" 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 205: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin 'Abbas: 

     I asked Jabir "Did the Prophet forbid fasting on
     Fridays?" He replied, "Yes." (Other narrators
     added, "If he intends to fast only that day.") 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 206: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "None of you should
     fast on Friday unless he fasts a day before or
     after it." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 207: 

     Narrated Abu Aiyub from Juwairiya bint
     Al-Harith: 

     The Prophet visited her (Juwairiya) on a Friday
     and she was fasting. He asked her, "Did you fast
     yesterday?" She said, "No." He said, "Do you
     intend to fast tomorrow?" She said, "No." He
     said, "Then break your fast." Through another
     series of narrators, Abu Aiyub is reported to
     have said, "He ordered her and she broke her
     fast." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 208: 

     Narrated Alqama: 

     I asked 'Aisha "Did Allah s Apostle, use to
     choose some special days (for fasting)?" She
     replied, "No, but he used to be regular (constant)
     (in his service of worshipping). Who amongst
     you can endure what Allah's Apostle used to
     endure?" 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 209: 

     Narrated Um Al-Fadl bint Al-Harith: 

     "While the people were with me on the day of
     'Arafat they differed as to whether the Prophet
     was fasting or not; some said that he was fasting
     while others said that he was not fasting. So, I
     sent to him a bowl full of milk while he was riding
     over his camel and he drank it." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 210: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     The people doubted whether the Prophet was
     fasting on the day of 'Arafat or not, so I sent milk
     while he was standing at 'Arafat, he drank it and
     the people were looking at him. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 211: 

     Narrated Abu 'Ubaid: 

     (the slave of Ibn Azhar) I witnessed the 'Id with
     'Umar bin Al-Kattab who said, Allah's Apostle
     has forbidden people to fast on the day on which
     you break fasting (the fasts of Ramadan) and the
     day on which you eat the meat of your sacrifices
     (the first day of 'Id ul Fitr and 'Id ul-Adha). 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 212: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id: 

     The Prophet forbade the fasting of 'Id-ul-Fitr and
     'Id-ul-Adha (two feast days) and also the
     wearing of As-Samma' (a single garment
     covering the whole body), and sitting with one's
     leg drawn up while being wrapped in one
     garment. He also forbade the prayers after the
     Fajr (morning) and the 'Asr (afternoon) prayers. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 213: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Two fasts and two kinds of sale are forbidden:
     fasting on the day of 'Id ul Fitr and 'Id-ul-Adha
     and the kinds of sale called Mulamasa and
     Munabadha. (These two kinds of sale used to be
     practiced in the days of Pre-lslamic period of
     ignorance; Mulamasa means when you touch
     something displayed for sale you have to buy it;
     Munabadha means when the seller throws
     something to you, you have to buy it.) 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 214: 

     Narrated Ziyad bin Jubair: 

     A man went to Ibn 'Umar I. and said, "A man
     vowed to fast one day (the sub-narrator thinks
     that he said that the day was Monday), and that
     day happened to be 'Id day." Ibn 'Umar said,
     "Allah orders vows to be fulfilled and the Prophet
     forbade the fasting on this day (i.e. Id)." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 215: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     (who fought in twelve Ghazawat in the company
     of the Prophet). I heard four things from the
     Prophet and they won my admiration. He said; 

     1. "No lady should travel on a journey of two
     days except with her husband or a Dhi-Mahram; 

     2. "No fasting is permissible on the two days of
     Id-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Adha; 

     3. "No prayer (may be offered) after the morning
     compulsory prayer until the sun rises; and no
     prayer after the 'Asr prayer till the sun sets; 

     4. "One should travel only for visiting three
     Masajid (Mosques): Masjid-ul-Haram (Mecca),
     Masjid-ul-Aqsa (Jerusalem), and this (my)
     Mosque (at Medina)." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 216: 

     Narrated 'Aisha and Ibn 'Umar: 

     Nobody was allowed to fast on the days of
     Tashrlq except those who could not afford the
     Hadi (Sacrifice). 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 217: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Fasting for those who perform ,Hajj-at-Tamattu'
     (in lieu of the Hadi which they cannot afford) may
     be performed up to the day of 'Arafat. And if
     one does not get a Hadi and has not fasted
     (before the 'Id) then one should fast of the days
     of Mina. (11, 12 and 13th of Dhul Hajja). 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 218: 

     Narrated Salim's father: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever wishes may fast on
     the day of 'Ashura'." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 219: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle ordered (the Muslims) to fast on
     the day of 'Ashura', and when fasting in the
     month of Ramadan was prescribed, it became
     optional for one to fast on that day ('Ashura') or
     not. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 220: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Quraish used to fast on the day of 'Ashura' in the
     Pre-lslamic period, and Allah's Apostle too, used
     to fast on that day. When he came to Medina, he
     fasted on that day and ordered others to fast,
     too. Later when the fasting of the month of
     Ramadan was prescribed, he gave up fasting on
     the day of 'Ashura' and it became optional for
     one to fast on it or not. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 221: 

     Narrated Humaid bin 'Abdur Rahman: 

     That he heard Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan on the
     day of 'Ashura' during the year he performed the
     Hajj, saying on the pulpit, "O the people of
     Medina! Where are your Religious Scholars? I
     heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'This is the day of
     'Ashura'. Allah has not enjoined its fasting on you
     but I am fasting it. You have the choice either to
     fast or not to fast (on this day).' " 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 222: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet came to Medina and saw the Jews
     fasting on the day of Ashura. He asked them
     about that. They replied, "This is a good day, the
     day on which Allah rescued Bani Israel from their
     enemy. So, Moses fasted this day." The Prophet
     said, "We have more claim over Moses than
     you." So, the Prophet fasted on that day and
     ordered (the Muslims) to fast (on that day). 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 223: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The day of 'Ashura' was considered as 'Id day
     by the Jews. So the Prophet ordered, "I
     recommend you (Muslims) to fast on this day." 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 224: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     I never saw the Prophet seeking to fast on a day
     more (preferable to him) than this day, the day of
     'Ashura', or this month, i.e. the month of
     Ramadan. 


Volume 3, Book 31, Number 225: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     The Prophet ordered a man from the tribe of
     Bani Aslam to announce amongst the people that
     whoever had eaten should fast the rest of the
     day, and whoever had not eaten should continue
     his fast, as that day was the day of 'Ashura' . 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 32: 

        Praying at Night in
    Ramadaan (Taraweeh) 



Volume 3, Book 32, Number 226: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying regarding
     Ramadan, "Whoever prayed at night in it (the
     month of Ramadan) out of sincere Faith and
     hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his
     previous sins will be forgiven." 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 227: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever prayed at night
     the whole month of Ramadan out of sincere Faith
     and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his
     previous sins will be forgiven." Ibn Shihab (a
     sub-narrator) said, "Allah's Apostle died and the
     people continued observing that (i.e. Nawafil
     offered individually, not in congregation), and it
     remained as it was during the Caliphate of Abu
     Bakr and in the early days of 'Umar's Caliphate."
     'Abdur Rahman bin 'Abdul Qari said, "I went out
     in the company of 'Umar bin Al-Khattab one
     night in Ramadan to the mosque and found the
     people praying in different groups. A man
     praying alone or a man praying with a little group
     behind him. So, 'Umar said, 'In my opinion I
     would better collect these (people) under the
     leadership of one Qari (Reciter) (i.e. let them
     pray in congregation!)'. So, he made up his mind
     to congregate them behind Ubai bin Ka'b. Then
     on another night I went again in his company and
     the people were praying behind their reciter. On
     that, 'Umar remarked, 'What an excellent Bid'a
     (i.e. innovation in religion) this is; but the prayer
     which they do not perform, but sleep at its time is
     better than the one they are offering.' He meant
     the prayer in the last part of the night. (In those
     days) people used to pray in the early part of the
     night." 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 228: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle used to
     pray (at night) in Ramadan. 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 229: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     That he was informed by 'Aisha, "Allah's Apostle
     went out in the middle of the night and prayed in
     the mosque and some men prayed behind him. In
     the morning, the people spoke about it and then
     a large number of them gathered and prayed
     behind him (on the second night). In the next
     morning the people again talked about it and on
     the third night the mosque was full with a large
     number of people. Allah's Apostle came out and
     the people prayed behind him. On the fourth
     night the Mosque was overwhelmed with people
     and could not accommodate them, but the
     Prophet came out (only) for the morning prayer.
     When the morning prayer was finished he recited
     Tashah-hud and (addressing the people) said,
     "Amma ba'du, your presence was not hidden
     from me but I was afraid lest the night prayer
     (Qiyam) should be enjoined on you and you
     might not be able to carry it on." So, Allah's
     Apostle died and the situation remained like that
     (i.e. people prayed individually). " 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 230: 

     Narrated Abu Salama bin 'Abdur Rahman: 

     that he asked 'Aisha "How was the prayer of
     Allah's Apostle in Ramadan?" She replied, "He
     did not pray more than eleven Rakat in Ramadan
     or in any other month. He used to pray four
     Rakat ---- let alone their beauty and
     length----and then he would pray four ----let
     alone their beauty and length ----and then he
     would pray three Rakat (Witr)." She added, "I
     asked, 'O Allah's Apostle! Do you sleep before
     praying the Witr?' He replied, 'O 'Aisha! My
     eyes sleep but my heart does not sleep." 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 231: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever fasted the month of
     Ramadan out of sincere Faith (i.e. belief) and
     hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his past
     sins will be forgiven, and whoever stood for the
     prayers in the night of Qadr out of sincere Faith
     and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his
     previous sins will be forgiven ." 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 232: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Some men amongst the companions of the
     Prophet were shown in their dreams that the
     night of Qadr was in the last seven nights of
     Ramadan. Allah's Apostle said, "It seems that all
     your dreams agree that (the Night of Qadr) is in
     the last seven nights, and whoever wants to
     search for it (i.e. the Night of Qadr) should
     search in the last seven (nights of Ramadan)." 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 233: 

     Narrated Abu Salama: 

     I asked Abu Sa'id, and he was a friend of mine,
     (about the Night of Qadr) and he said, "We
     practiced Itikaf (seclusion in the mosque) in the
     middle third of the month of Ramadan with the
     Prophet . In the morning of the 20th of Ramadan,
     the Prophet came and addressed us and said, 'I
     was informed of (the date of the Night of Qadr)
     but I was caused to forget it; so search for it in
     the odd nights of the last ten nights of the month
     of Ramadan. (In the dream) I saw myself
     prostrating in mud and water (as a sign). So,
     whoever was in l'tikaf with me should return to it
     with me (for another 10-day's period)', and we
     returned. At that time there was no sign of clouds
     in the sky but suddenly a cloud came and it
     rained till rain-water started leaking through the
     roof of the mosque which was made of
     date-palm leaf stalks. Then the prayer was
     established and I saw Allah's Apostle prostrating
     in mud and water and I saw the traces of mud on
     his forehead." 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 234: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Search for the Night of
     Qadr in the odd nights of the last ten days of
     Ramadan." 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 235: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf (in the
     mosque) in the middle third of Ramadan and
     after passing the twenty nights he used to go
     back to his house on the 21st, and the people
     who were in Itikaf with him also used to go back
     to their houses. Once in Ramadan, in which he
     practiced Itikaf, he established the night prayers
     at the night in which he used to return home, and
     then he addressed the people and ordered them
     whatever Allah wished him to order and said, "I
     used to practice Itikaf for these ten days (i.e. the
     middle 113rd but now I intend to stay in Itikaf
     for the last ten days (of the month); so whoever
     was in Itikaf with me should stay at his place of
     seclusion. I have verily been shown (the date of)
     this Night (of Qadr) but I have forgotten it. So
     search for it in the odd nights of the last ten days
     (of this month). I also saw myself (in the dream)
     prostrating in mud and water." On the night of the
     21st, the sky was covered with clouds and it
     rained, and the rain-water started leaking through
     the roof of the mosque at the praying place of the
     Prophet . I saw with my own eyes the Prophet at
     the completion of the morning prayer leaving with
     his face covered with mud and water. 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 236: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "Look for (the Night of
     Qadr)." 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 237: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf in the last
     ten nights of Ramadan and used to say, "Look
     for the Night of Qadr in the last ten nights of the
     month of Ramadan ," 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 238: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "Look for the Night of Qadr in
     the last ten nights of Ramadan ,' on the night
     when nine or seven or five nights remain out of
     the last ten nights of Ramadan (i.e. 21, 23, 25,
     respectively)." 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 239: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The Night of Qadr is in the
     last ten nights of the month (Ramadan), either on
     the first nine or in the last (remaining) seven nights
     (of Ramadan)." Ibn 'Abbas added, "Search for it
     on the twenty-fourth (of Ramadan)." 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 240: 

     Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit: 

     The Prophet came out to inform us about the
     Night of Qadr but two Muslims were quarreling
     with each other. So, the Prophet said, "I came
     out to inform you about the Night of Qadr but
     such-and-such persons were quarreling, so the
     news about it had been taken away; yet that
     might be for your own good, so search for it on
     the 29th, 27th and 25th (of Ramadan). 


Volume 3, Book 32, Number 241: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     With the start of the last ten days of Ramadan,
     the Prophet used to tighten his waist belt (i.e.
     work hard) and used to pray all the night, and
     used to keep his family awake for the prayers. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 33: 

    Retiring to a Mosque for
     Remembrance of Allah
                 (I'tikaf) 



Volume 3, Book 33, Number 242: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle used to practise Itikaf in the last
     ten days of the month of Ramadan. 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 243: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) The Prophet used to
     practice Itikaf in the last ten days of Ramadan till
     he died and then his wives used to practice Itikaf
     after him. 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 244: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf in the
     middle ten days of Ramadan and once he stayed
     in Itikaf till the night of the twenty-first and it was
     the night in the morning of which he used to come
     out of his Itikaf. The Prophet said, "Whoever
     was in Itikaf with me should stay in Itikaf for the
     last ten days, for I was informed (of the date) of
     the Night (of Qadr) but I have been caused to
     forget it. (In the dream) I saw myself prostrating
     in mud and water in the morning of that night. So,
     look for it in the last ten nights and in the odd
     ones of them." It rained that night and the roof of
     the mosque dribbled as it was made of leaf stalks
     of date-palms. I saw with my own eyes the mark
     of mud and water on the forehead of the Prophet
     (i.e. in the morning of the twenty-first). 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 245: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to (put) bend his head (out) to
     me while he was in Itikaf in the mosque during
     my monthly periods and I would comb and oil his
     hair. 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 246: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle used to
     let his head in (the house) while he was in the
     mosque and I would comb and oil his hair. When
     in Itikaf he used not to enter the house except for
     a need. 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 247: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to embrace me during my
     menses. He also used to put his head out of the
     mosque while he was in Itikaf, and I would wash
     it during my menses. 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 248: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Umar asked the Prophet "I vowed in the
     Pre-lslamic period of ignorance to stay in Itikaf
     for one night in Al-Masjid al-Haram." The
     Prophet said to him, "Fulfill your vow." 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 249: 

     Narrated 'Amra: 

     Aisha said, "the Prophet used to practice Itikaf in
     the last ten days of Ramadan and I used to pitch
     a tent for him, and after offering the morning
     prayer, he used to enter the tent." Hafsa asked
     the permission of 'Aisha to pitch a tent for her
     and she allowed her and she pitched her tent.
     When Zainab bint Jahsh saw it, she pitched
     another tent. In the morning the Prophet noticed
     the tents. He said, 'What is this?" He was told of
     the whole situation. Then the Prophet said, "Do
     you think that they intended to do righteousness
     by doing this?" He therefore abandoned the Itikaf
     in that month and practiced Itikaf for ten days in
     the month of Shawwal." 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 250: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet intended to practice Itikaf and when
     he reached the place where he intended to
     perform Itikaf, he saw some tents, the tents of
     'Aisha, Hafsa and Zainab. So, he said, "Do you
     consider that they intended to do righteousness
     by doing this?" And then he went away and did
     not perform Itikaf (in Ramadan) but performed it
     in the month of Shawwal for ten days. 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 251: 

     Narrated Ali bin Al-Husain: 

     Safiya, the wife of the Prophet told me that she
     went to Allah's Apostle to visit him in the mosque
     while he was in Itikaf in the last ten days of
     Ramadan. She had a talk with him for a while,
     then she got up in order to return home. The
     Prophet accompanied her. When they reached
     the gate of the mosque, opposite the door of
     Um-Salama, two Ansari men were passing by
     and they greeted Allah's Apostle . He told them:
     Do not run away! And said, "She is (my wife)
     Safiya bint Huyai." Both of them said, "Subhan
     Allah, (How dare we think of any evil) O Allah's
     Apostle!" And they felt it. The Prophet said (to
     them), "Satan reaches everywhere in the human
     body as blood reaches in it, (everywhere in one's
     body). I was afraid lest Satan might insert an evil
     thought in your minds." 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 252: 

     Narrated Abu Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman: 

     I asked Abu Said Al-Khudri, "Did you hear
     Allah's Apostle talking about the Night of Qadr?"
     He replied in the affirmative and said, "Once we
     were in Itikaf with Allah's Apostle in the middle
     ten days of (Ramadan) and we came out of it in
     the morning of the twentieth, and Allah's
     Apostle- delivered a sermon on the 20th (of
     Ramadan) and said, 'I was informed (of the date)
     of the Night of Qadr (in my dream) but had
     forgotten it. So, look for it in the odd nights of
     the last ten nights of the month of Ramadan. I
     saw myself prostrating in mud and water on that
     night (as a sign of the Night of Qadr). So,
     whoever had been in Itikaf with Allah's Apostle
     should return for it.' The people returned to the
     mosque (for Itikaf). There was no trace of clouds
     in the sky. But all of a sudden a cloud came and
     it rained. Then the prayer was established (they
     stood for the prayer) and Allah's Apostle
     prostrated in mud and water and I saw mud over
     the forehead and the nose of the Prophet. 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 253: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     One of the wives of Allah's Apostle practiced
     Itikaf with him while she ad bleeding in between
     her periods and she would see red (blood) or
     yellowish traces, and sometimes we put a tray
     beneath her when she offered the prayer. 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 254: 

     Narrated 'Ali bin Al-Husain (from Safiya, the
     Prophet's wife): 

     The wives of the Prophet were with him in the
     mosque (while he was in Itikaf) and then they
     departed and the Prophet said to Safiya bint
     Huyai, "Don't hurry up, for I shall accompany
     you," (and her dwelling was in the house of
     Usama). The Prophet went out and in the
     meantime two Ansari men met him and they
     looked at the Prophet and passed by. The
     Prophet said to them, "Come here. She is (my
     wife) Safiya bint Huyai." They replied, "Subhan
     Allah, (How dare we think of evil) O Allah's
     Apostle! (we never expect anything bad from
     you)." The Prophet replied, "Satan circulates in
     the human being as blood circulates in the body,
     and I was afraid lest Satan might insert an evil
     thought in your minds." 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 255: 

     Narrated 'Ali bin Al-Husain from Safiya: 

     Safiya went to the Prophet while he was in Itikaf.
     When she returned, the Prophet accompanied
     her walking. An Ansari man saw him. When the
     Prophet noticed him, he called him and said,
     "Come here. She is Safiya. (Sufyan a
     sub-narrator perhaps said that the Prophet had
     said, "This is Safiya"). And Satan circulates in the
     body of Adam's offspring as his blood circulates
     in it." 

     (A sub-narrator asked Sufyan, "Did Safiya visit
     him at night?" He said, "Of course, at night.") 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 256: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     We practiced Itikaf with Allah's Apostle in the
     middle ten days (of Ramadan). In the morning of
     the twentieth (of Ramadan) we shifted our
     baggage, but Allah's Apostle came to us and
     said, "Whoever was m Itikaf should return to his
     place of Itikaf, for I saw (i.e. was informed about
     the date of) this Night (of Qadr) and saw myself
     prostrating in mud and water." When I returned
     to my place the sky was overcast with clouds
     and it rained. By Him Who sent Muhammad with
     the Truth, the sky was covered with clouds from
     the end of that day, and the mosque which was
     roofed with leaf-stalks of date palm trees (leaked
     with rain) and I saw the trace of mud and water
     over the nose of the Prophet and its tip. 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 257: 

     Narrated 'Amra bint 'Abdur-Rahman from
     'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf every year
     in the month of Ramadan. And after offering the
     morning prayer, he used to enter the place of his
     Itikaf. 'Aisha asked his permission to let her
     practice Itikaf and he allowed her, and so she
     pitched a tent in the mosque. When Hafsa heard
     of that, she also pitched a tent (for herself), and
     when Zainab heard of that, she too pitched
     another tent. When, in the morning, Allah's
     Apostle had finished the morning prayer, he saw
     four tents and asked, "What is this?" He was
     informed about it. He then said, "What made
     them do this? Is it righteousness? Remove the
     tents, for I do not want to see them." So, the
     tents were removed. The Prophet did not
     perform Itikaf that year in the month of
     Ramadan, but did it in the last ten days of
     Shawwal. 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 258: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
     vowed in the Pre-lslamic period to perform Itikaf
     in Al-Masjid-al-Haram for one night." The
     Prophet said, "Fulfill your vow." So, he
     performed Itikaf for one night. 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 259: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     that 'Umar had vowed in the Pre-lslamic period
     to perform Itikaf in Al-Masjid-al-Haram. (A
     sub-narrator thinks that 'Umar vowed to perform
     Itikaf for one night.) Allah's Apostle said to
     'Umar, "Fulfill your vow." 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 260: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet used to perform Itikaf every year in
     the month of Ramadan for ten days, and when it
     was the year of his death, he stayed in Itikaf for
     twenty days. 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 261: 

     Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman from 'Aisha:
     Allah's Apostle mentioned that he would practice
     Itikaf in the last ten days of Ramadan. 'Aisha
     asked his permission to perform Itikaf and he
     permitted her. Hafsa asked 'Aisha to take his
     permission for 


Volume 3, Book 33, Number 262: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     Aisha during her menses used to comb and oil
     the hair of the Prophet while he used to be in
     Itikaf in the mosque. He would stretch out his
     head towards her while she was in her chamber. 


 Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 34: 

          Sales and Trade 



Volume 3, Book 34, Number 263: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     You people say that Abu Huraira tells many
     narrations from Allah's Apostle and you also
     wonder why the emigrants and Ansar do not
     narrate from Allah's Apostle as Abu Huraira
     does. My emigrant brothers were busy in the
     market while I used to stick to Allah's Apostle
     content with what fills my stomach; so I used to
     be present when they were absent and I used to
     remember when they used to forget, and my
     Ansari brothers used to be busy with their
     properties and I was one of the poor men of
     Suffa. I used to remember the narrations when
     they used to forget. No doubt, Allah's Apostle
     once said, "Whoever spreads his garment till I
     have finished my present speech and then gathers
     it to himself, will remember whatever I will say."
     So, I spread my colored garment which I was
     wearing till Allah's Apostle had finished his
     saying, and then I gathered it to my chest. So, I
     did not forget any of that narrations. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 264: 

     Narrated Ibrahim bin Sad from his father from
     his grand-father: 

     Abdur Rahman bin Auf said, "When we came to
     Medina as emigrants, Allah's Apostle established
     a bond of brotherhood between me and Sad bin
     Ar-Rabi'. Sad bin Ar-Rabi' said (to me), 'I am
     the richest among the Ansar, so I will give you
     half of my wealth and you may look at my two
     wives and whichever of the two you may choose
     I will divorce her, and when she has completed
     the prescribed period (before marriage) you may
     marry her.' Abdur-Rahman replied, "I am not in
     need of all that. Is there any market-place where
     trade is practiced?' He replied, "The market of
     Qainuqa." Abdur-Rahman went to that market
     the following day and brought some dried
     butter-milk (yogurt) and butter, and then he
     continued going there regularly. Few days later,
     'AbdurRahman came having traces of yellow
     (scent) on his body. Allah's Apostle asked him
     whether he had got married. He replied in the
     affirmative. The Prophet said, 'Whom have you
     married?' He replied, 'A woman from the Ansar.'
     Then the Prophet asked, 'How much did you pay
     her?' He replied, '(I gave her) a gold piece equal
     in weigh to a date stone (or a date stone of
     gold)! The Prophet said, 'Give a Walima
     (wedding banquet) even if with one sheep .' " 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 265: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When Abdur-Rahman bin Auf came to Medina,
     the Prophet established a bond of brotherhood
     between him and Sad bin Ar-Rabi al-Ansari.
     Sad was a rich man, so he said to
     'Abdur-Rahman, "I will give you half of my
     property and will help you marry."
     'Abdur-Rahman said (to him), "May Allah bless
     you in your family and property. Show me the
     market." So 'Abdur-Rahman did not return from
     the market) till he gained some dried buttermilk
     (yoghurt) and butter (through trading). He
     brought that to his house-hold. We stayed for
     some-time (or as long as Allah wished), and then
     Abdur-Rahman came, scented with yellowish
     perfume. The Prophet said (to him) "What is
     this?" He replied, "I got married to an Ansari
     woman." The Prophet asked, "What did you pay
     her?" He replied, "A gold stone or gold equal to
     the weight of a date stone." The Prophet said (to
     him), "Give a wedding banquet even if with one
     sheep." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 266: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     'Ukaz, Majanna and Dhul-Majaz were
     market-places in the Pre-lslamic period of
     ignorance. When Islam came, Muslims felt that
     marketing there might be a sin. So, the Divine
     Inspiration came: "There is no harm for you to
     seek the bounty of your Lord (in the seasons of
     Hajj)." (2.198) Ibn 'Abbas recited the Verse in
     this way. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 267: 

     Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir: 

     The Prophet said "Both legal and illegal things are
     obvious, and in between them are (suspicious)
     doubtful matters. So who-ever forsakes those
     doubtful things lest he may commit a sin, will
     definitely avoid what is clearly illegal; and
     who-ever indulges in these (suspicious) doubtful
     things bravely, is likely to commit what is clearly
     illegal. Sins are Allah's Hima (i.e. private pasture)
     and whoever pastures (his sheep) near it, is likely
     to get in it at any moment." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 268: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Abu Mulaika: 

     y the same woman)?" His wife was the daughter
     of Abu Ihab-al-Tamimi. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 269: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Utba bin Abu Waqqas took a firm promise from
     his brother Sad bin Abu Waqqas to take the son
     of the slave-girl of Zam'a into his custody as he
     was his (i.e. 'Utba's) son. In the year of the
     Conquest (of Mecca) Sad bin Abu Waqqas
     took him, and said that he was his brother's son,
     and his brother took a promise from him to that
     effect. 'Abu bin Zam'a got up and said, "He is my
     brother and the son of the slave-girl of my father
     and was born on my father's bed." Then they
     both went to the Prophet Sad said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! He is the son of my brother and he has
     taken a promise from me that I will take him."
     'Abu bin Zam'a said, "(He is) my brother and the
     son of my father's slave-girl and was born on my
     father's bed." Allah's Apostle said, "The boy is
     for you. O 'Abu bin Zam'a." Then the Prophet
     said, "The son is for the bed (i.e the man on
     whose bed he was born) and stones
     (disappointment and deprivation) for the one
     who has done illegal sexual intercourse." The
     Prophet told his wife Sauda bint Zam'a to screen
     herself from that boy as he noticed a similarity
     between the boy and 'Utba. So, the boy did not
     see her till he died. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 270: 

     Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim: 

     I asked Allah's Apostle about Al Mirad (i.e. a
     sharp-edged piece of wood or a piece of wood
     provided with a piece of iron used for hunting).
     He replied, "If the game is hit by its sharp edge,
     eat it, and if it is hit by its broad side, do not eat
     it, for it has been beaten to death." I asked, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I release my dog by the name of
     Allah and find with it at the game, another dog on
     which I have not mentioned the name of Allah,
     and I do not know which one of them caught the
     game." Allah's Apostle said (to him), 'Don't eat it
     as you have mentioned the name of Allah on your
     dog and not on the other dog." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 271: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet passed by a fallen date and said,
     "Were it not for my doubt that this might have
     been given in charity, I would have eaten it." And
     narrated Abu Huraira the Prophet said, "I found
     a date-fruit fallen on my bed." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 272: 

     Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim: 

     that his uncle said: "The Prophet was asked: If a
     person feels something during his prayer; should
     one interrupt his prayer?" The Prophet said: No!
     You should not give it up unless you hear a
     sound or smell something." Narrated Ibn Abi
     Hafsa: Az-Zuhri said, "There is no need of
     repeating ablution unless you detect a smell or
     hear a sound." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 273: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Some people said, "O Allah's Apostle! Meat is
     brought to us by some people and we are not
     sure whether the name of Allah has been
     mentioned on it or not (at the time of slaughtering
     the animals)." Allah's Apostle said (to them),
     "Mention the name of Allah and eat it." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 274: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     While we were offering the prayer with the
     Prophet a caravan carrying food came from
     Sham. The people looked towards the caravan
     (and went to it) and only twelve persons
     remained with the Prophet. So, the Divine
     Inspiration came; "But when they see some
     bargain or some amusement, they disperse
     headlong to it." (62.11) 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 275: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A time will come when one
     will not care how one gains one's money, legally
     or illegally." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 276: 

     Narrated Abu Al-Minhal: 

     I used to practice money exchange, and I asked
     Zaid bin 'Arqam about it, and he narrated what
     the Prophet said in the following: Abu Al-Minhal
     said, "I asked Al-Bara' bin 'Azib and Zaid bin
     Arqam about practicing money exchange. They
     replied, 'We were traders in the time of Allah's
     Apostle and I asked Allah's Apostle about
     money exchange. He replied, 'If it is from hand to
     hand, there is no harm in it; otherwise it is not
     permissible." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 277: 

     Narrated 'Ubai bin 'Umar: 

     Abu Musa asked Umar to admit him but he was
     not admitted as 'Umar was busy, so Abu Musa
     went back. When 'Umar finished his job he said,
     "Didn't I hear the voice of 'Abdullah bin Qais?
     Let him come in." 'Umar was told that he had
     left. So, he sent for him and on his arrival, he
     (Abu Musa) said, "We were ordered to do so
     (i.e. to leave if not admitted after asking
     permission thrice). 'Umar told him, "Bring witness
     in proof of your statement." Abu Musa went to
     the Ansar's meeting places and asked them. They
     said, "None amongst us will give this witness
     except the youngest of us, Abu Said Al-Khudri.
     Abu Musa then took Abu Said Al-Khudri (to
     'Umar) and 'Umar said, surprisingly, "Has this
     order of Allah's Apostle been hidden from me?"
     (Then he added), "I used to be busy trading in
     markets." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 278: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     A caravan arrived (at Medina) while we were
     offering the Jumua prayer with the Prophet. The
     people left out for the caravan, with the
     exception of twelve persons. Then this Verse
     was revealed: 'But when they see some bargain
     or some amusement, they disperse headlong to it
     and leave you standing." (62.11) 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 279: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "If a woman gives in charity
     from her house meals without wasting (i.e. being
     extravagant), she will get the reward for her
     giving, and her husband will also get the reward
     for his earning and the storekeeper will also get a
     similar reward. The acquisition of the reward of
     none of them will reduce the reward of the
     others." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 280: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "If a woman gives something
     (i.e. in charity) from her husband's earnings
     without his permission, she will get half his
     reward." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 281: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "whoever desires
     an expansion in his sustenance and age, should
     keep good relations with his Kith and kin." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 282: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet purchased food grains from a Jew
     on credit and mortgaged his iron armor to him. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 283: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     Anas went to the Prophet with barley bread
     having some dissolved fat on it. The Prophet had
     mortgaged his armor to a Jew in Medina and
     took from him some barley for his family. Anas
     heard him saying, "The household of Muhammad
     did not possess even a single Sa of wheat or
     food grains for the evening meal, although he has
     nine wives to look after." (See Hadith No. 685) 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 284: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When Abu Bakr As-Siddiq was chosen Caliph,
     he said, "My people know that my profession
     was not incapable of providing substance to my
     family. And as I will be busy serving the Muslim
     nation, my family will eat from the National
     Treasury of Muslims, and I will practise the
     profession of serving the Muslims." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 285: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The companions of Allah's Apostle used to
     practise manual labor, so their sweat used to
     smell, and they were advised to take a bath. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 286: 

     Narrated Al-Miqdam: 

     The Prophet said, "Nobody has ever eaten a
     better meal than that which one has earned by
     working with one's own hands. The Prophet of
     Allah, David used to eat from the earnings of his
     manual labor." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 287: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The Prophet David used
     not to eat except from the earnings of his manual
     labor." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 288: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "One would rather cut and
     carry a bundle of wood on his back than ask
     somebody who may or may not live him." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 289: 

     Narrated Az-Zubair bin Al-Awwam: 

     The Prophet said, "One would rather take a rope
     and cut wood and carry it than ask others)." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 290: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "May Allah's mercy be on
     him who is lenient in his buying, selling, and in
     demanding back his money." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 291: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     The Prophet said, "Before your time the angels
     received the soul of a man and asked him, 'Did
     you do any good deeds (in your life)?' He
     replied, 'I used to order my employees to grant
     time to the rich person to pay his debts at his
     convenience.' So Allah said to the angels;
     "Excuse him." Rabi said that (the dead man said),
     'I used to be easy to the rich and grant time to
     the poor.' Or, in another narration, 'grant time to
     the well-off and forgive the needy,' or, 'accept
     from the well-off and forgive the needy.' 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 292: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "There was a merchant who
     used to lend the people, and whenever his debtor
     was in straitened circumstances, he would say to
     his employees, 'Forgive him so that Allah may
     forgive us.' So, Allah forgave him." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 293: 

     Narrated Hakim bin Hizam: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The seller and the buyer
     have the right to keep or return goods as long as
     they have not parted or till they part; and if both
     the parties spoke the truth and described the
     defects and qualities (of the goods), then they
     would be blessed in their transaction, and if they
     told lies or hid something, then the blessings of
     their transaction would be lost." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 294: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     We used to be given mixed dates (from the
     booty) and used to sell (barter) two Sas of those
     dates) for one Sa (of good dates). The Prophet
     said (to us), "No (bartering of) two Sas for one
     Sa nor two Dirhams for one Dirham is
     permissible", (as that is a kind of usury). (See
     Hadith No. 405). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 295: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud: 

     An Ansari man, called Abu Shu'aib, came and
     told his butcher slave, "Prepare meals sufficient
     for five persons, for I want to invite the Prophet
     along with four other persons as I saw signs of
     hunger on his face." Abu Shu'aib invited them
     and another person came along with them. The
     Prophet said (to Abu Shu'aib), This man
     followed us, so if you allow him, he will join us,
     and if you want him to return, he will go back."
     Abu Shu'aib said, "No, I have allowed him (i.e.
     he, too, is welcomed to the meal)." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 296: 

     Narrated Hakim bin Hizam: 

     The Prophet aid, "The buyer and the seller have
     the option to cancel or to confirm the deal, as
     long as they have not parted or till they part, and
     if they spoke the truth and told each other the
     defects of the things, then blessings would be in
     their deal, and if they hid something and told lies,
     the blessing of the deal would be lost." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 297: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     When the last Verses of Surat al- Baqara were
     revealed, the Prophet recited them in the mosque
     and proclaimed the trade of alcohol as illegal. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 298: 

     Narrated Samura bin Jundab: 

     The Prophet said, "This night I dreamt that two
     men came and took me to a Holy land whence
     we proceeded on till we reached a river of
     blood, where a man was standing, and on its
     bank was standing another man with stones in his
     hands. The man in the middle of the river tried to
     come out, but the other threw a stone in his
     mouth and forced him to go back to his original
     place. So, whenever he tried to come out, the
     other man would throw a stone in his mouth and
     force him to go back to his former place. I
     asked, 'Who is this?' I was told, 'The person in
     the river was a Riba-eater." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 299: 

     Narrated 'Aun bin Abu Juhaifa: 

     My father bought a slave who practiced the
     profession of cupping. (My father broke the
     slave's instruments of cupping). I asked my father
     why he had done so. He replied, "The Prophet
     forbade the acceptance of the price of a dog or
     blood, and also forbade the profession of
     tattooing, getting tattooed and receiving or giving
     Riba, (usury), and cursed the picture-makers." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 300: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The swearing (by
     the seller) may persuade the buyer to purchase
     the goods but that will be deprived of Allah's
     blessing." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 301: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa: 

     A man displayed some goods in the market and
     swore by Allah that he had been offered so much
     for that, that which was not offered, and he said
     so, so as to cheat a Muslim. On that occasion the
     following Verse was revealed: "Verily! Those
     who purchase a small gain at the cost of Allah's
     covenant and their oaths (They shall have no
     portion in the Hereafter ..etc.)' (3.77) 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 302: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     I got an old she-camel as my share from the
     booty, and the Prophet had given me another
     from Al-Khumus. And when I intended to marry
     Fatima (daughter of the Prophet), I arranged that
     a goldsmith from the tribe of Bani Qainuqa'
     would accompany me in order to bring Idhkhir
     and then sell it to the goldsmiths and use its price
     for my marriage banquet. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 303: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Allah made Mecca a
     sanctuary and it was neither permitted for anyone
     before, nor will it be permitted for anyone after
     me (to fight in it). And fighting in it was made
     legal for me for a few hours of a day only. None
     is allowed to uproot its thorny shrubs or to cut
     down its trees or to chase its game or to pick up
     its Luqata (fallen things) except by a person who
     would announce it publicly." 'Abbas bin
     'Abdul-Muttlib requested the Prophet, "Except
     Al-Idhkhir, for our goldsmiths and for the roofs
     of our houses." The Prophet said, "Except
     Al-Idhkhir." 'Ikrima said, "Do you know what is
     meant by chasing its game? It is to drive it out of
     the shade and sit in its place." Khalid said,
     "('Abbas said: Al-Idhkhir) for our goldsmiths and
     our graves." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 304: 

     Narrated Khabbab: 

     I was a blacksmith in the Pre-lslamic period, and
     'Asi bin Wail owed me some money, so I went
     to him to demand it. He said (to me), "I will not
     pay you unless you disbelieve Muhammad." I
     said, "I will not disbelieve till Allah kills you and
     then you get resurrected." He said, "Leave me till
     I die and get resurrected, then I will be given
     wealth and children and I will pay you your
     debt." On that occasion it was revealed to the
     Prophet: 

     'Have you seen him who disbelieved in Our signs
     and says: Surely I will be given wealth and
     children? Has he known the unseen, or has he
     taken a covenant from the Beneficent (Allah)?
     (19.77-78) 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 305: 

     Narrated Ishaq bin 'Abdullah bin Abu Talha: 

     I heard Anas bin Malik saying, "A tailor invited
     Allah's Apostle to a meal which he had prepared.
     " Anas bin Malik said, "I accompanied Allah's
     Apostle to that meal. He served the Prophet with
     bread and soup made with gourd and dried
     meat. I saw the Prophet taking the pieces of
     gourd from the dish." Anas added, "Since that
     day I have continued to like gourd." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 306: 

     Narrated Abu Hazim: 

     I heard Sahl bin Sad saying, "A woman brought
     a Burda (i.e. a square piece of cloth having
     edging). I asked, 'Do you know what a Burda
     is?' They replied in the affirmative and said, "It is
     a cloth sheet with woven margins." Sahl went on,
     "She addressed the Prophet and said, 'I have
     woven it with my hands for you to wear.' The
     Prophet took it as he was in need of it, and came
     to us wearing it as a waist sheet. One of us said,
     'O Allah's Apostle! Give it to me to wear.' The
     Prophet agreed to give it to him. The Prophet sat
     with the people for a while and then returned
     (home), wrapped that waist sheet and sent it to
     him. The people said to that man, 'You haven't
     done well by asking him for it when you know
     that he never turns down anybody's request.' The
     man replied, 'By Allah, I have not asked him for
     it except to use it as my shroud when I die." Sahl
     added; "Later it (i.e. that sheet) was his shroud." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 307: 

     Narrated Abu Hazim: 

     Some men came to Sahl bin Sad to ask him
     about the pulpit. He replied, "Allah's Apostle sent
     for a woman (Sahl named her) (this message):
     'Order your slave carpenter to make pieces of
     wood (i.e. a pulpit) for me so that I may sit on it
     while addressing the people.' So, she ordered
     him to make it from the tamarisk of the forest. He
     brought it to her and she sent it to Allah's Apostle
     . Allah's Apostle ordered it to be placed in the
     mosque: so, it was put and he sat on it. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 308: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: An Ansari woman
     said to Allah's Apostle, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall
     I make something for you to sit on, as I have a
     slave who is a carpenter?" He replied, "If you
     wish." So, she got a pulpit made for him. When it
     was Friday 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 309: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle bought food grains from a Jew
     on credit and mortgaged his armor to him. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 310: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     I was with the Prophet in a Ghazwa (Military
     Expedition) and my camel was slow and
     exhausted. The Prophet came up to me and said,
     "O Jabir." I replied, "Yes?" He said, "What is the
     matter with you?" I replied, "My camel is slow
     and tired, so I am left behind." So, he got down
     and poked the camel with his stick and then
     ordered me to ride. I rode the camel and it
     became so fast that I had to hold it from going
     ahead of Allah's Apostle . He then asked me,
     have you got married?" I replied in the
     affirmative. He asked, "A virgin or a matron?" I
     replied, "I married a matron." The Prophet said,
     "Why have you not married a virgin, so that you
     may play with her and she may play with you?"
     Jabir replied, "I have sisters (young in age) so I
     liked to marry a matron who could collect them
     all and comb their hair and look after them." The
     Prophet said, "You will reach, so when you have
     arrived (at home), I advise you to associate with
     your wife (that you may have an intelligent son)."
     Then he asked me, "Would you like to sell your
     camel?" I replied in the affirmative and the
     Prophet purchased it for one Uqiya of gold.
     Allah's Apostle reached before me and I reached
     in the morning, and when I went to the mosque, I
     found him at the door of the mosque. He asked
     me, "Have you arrived just now?" I replied in the
     affirmative. He said, "Leave your camel and
     come into (the mosque) and pray two Rakat." I
     entered and offered the prayer. He told Bilal to
     weigh and give me one Uqiya of gold. So Bilal
     weighed for me fairly and I went away. The
     Prophet sent for me and I thought that he would
     return to me my camel which I hated more than
     anything else. But the Prophet said to me, "Take
     your camel as well as its price." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 311: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     'Ukaz, Majanna and Dhul-Majaz were markets
     in the Pre-lslamic period. When the people
     embraced Islam they considered it a sin to trade
     there. So, the following Holy Verse came:--
     'There is no harm for you if you seek of the
     bounty of your Lord (Allah) in the Hajj season."
     (2.198) Ibn 'Abbas recited it like this. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 312: 

     Narrated 'Amr: 

     Here (i.e. in Mecca) there was a man called
     Nawwas and he had camels suffering from the
     disease of excessive and unquenchable thirst. Ibn
     'Umar went to the partner of Nawwas and
     bought those camels. The man returned to
     Nawwas and told him that he had sold those
     camels. Nawwas asked him, "To whom have
     you sold them?" He replied, "To such and such
     Sheikh." Nawwas said, "Woe to you; By Allah,
     that Sheikh was Ibn 'Umar." Nawwas then went
     to Ibn 'Umar and said to him, "My partner sold
     you camels suffering from the disease of
     excessive thirst and he had not known you." Ibn
     'Umar told him to take them back. When
     Nawwas went to take them, Ibn 'Umar said to
     him, "Leave them there as I am happy with the
     decision of Allah's Apostle that there is no
     oppression . " 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 313: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     We set out with Allah's Apostle in the year of
     Hunain, (the Prophet gave me an armor). I sold
     that armor and bought a garden in the region of
     the tribe of Bani Salama and that was the first
     property I got after embracing Islam. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 314: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The example of a good
     companion (who sits with you) in comparison
     with a bad one, is I like that of the musk seller
     and the blacksmith's bellows (or furnace); from
     the first you would either buy musk or enjoy its
     good smell while the bellows would either burn
     your clothes or your house, or you get a bad
     nasty smell thereof." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 315: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Abu Taiba cupped Allah's Apostle so he ordered
     that he be paid one Sa of dates and ordered his
     masters to reduce his tax (as he was a slave and
     had to pay a tax to them). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 316: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once the Prophet got his blood out (medically)
     and paid that person who had done it. If it had
     been illegal, the Prophet would not have paid
     him. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 317: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Once the Prophet sent to 'Umar a silken
     two-piece garment, and when he saw 'Umar
     wearing it, he said to him, "I have not sent it to
     you to wear. It is worn by him who has no share
     in the Hereafter, and I have sent it to you so that
     you could benefit by it (i.e. sell it)." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 318: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     (mother of the faithful believers) I bought a
     cushion with pictures on it. When Allah's Apostle
     saw it, he kept standing at the door and did not
     enter the house. I noticed the sign of disgust on
     his face, so I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I repent to
     Allah and H is Apostle . (Please let me know)
     what sin I have done." Allah's Apostle said,
     "What about this cushion?" I replied, "I bought it
     for you to sit and recline on." Allah's Apostle
     said, "The painters (i.e. owners) of these pictures
     will be punished on the Day of Resurrection. It
     will be said to them, 'Put life in what you have
     created (i.e. painted).' " The Prophet added,
     "The angels do not enter a house where there are
     pictures." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 319: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "O Bani Najjar! Suggest a
     price for your garden." Part of it was a ruin and it
     contained some date palms. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 320: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "The buyer and the seller have
     the option to cancel or confirm the bargain
     before they separate from each other or if the
     sale is optional." Nafi said, "Ibn 'Umar used to
     separate quickly from the seller if he had bought
     a thing which he liked." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 321: 

     Narrated Haklm bin Hizam" 

     The Prophet said, "The buyer and the seller have
     the option of cancelling or confirming the deal
     unless they separate." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 322: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The seller and the buyer
     have the option of cancelling or confirming the
     deal unless they separate, or one of them says to
     the other, 'Choose (i.e. decide to cancel or
     confirm the bargain now)." Perhaps he said, 'Or
     if it is an optional sale.' " Ibn Umar, Shuraih,
     Ash-Shabi, Tawus, Ata, and Ibn Abu Mulaika
     agree upon this judgment. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 323: 

     Narrated Hakim bin Hizam: 

     The Prophet said, "The buyer and the seller have
     the option of cancelling or confirming the bargain
     unless they separate, and if they spoke the truth
     and made clear the defects of the goods, them
     they would be blessed in their bargain, and if they
     told lies and hid some facts, their bargain would
     be deprived of Allah's blessings." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 324: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: Allah's Apostle
     said, "Both the buyer and the seller have the
     option of cancelling or confirming a bargain
     unless they separate, or the sale is optional." (See
     Hadith No.320). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 325: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: Allah's Apostle said, "Both
     the buyer and the seller have the option of
     cancelling or confirming the bargain, as long as
     they are still together, and unless they separate or
     one of them gives the other the option of keeping
     or re 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 326: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "No deal is settled and
     finalized unless the buyer and the seller separate,
     except if the deal is optional (whereby the validity
     of the bargain depends on the stipulations agreed
     upon)." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 327: 

     Narrated Hakim bin Hizam: 

     The Prophet said, "Both the buyer and the seller
     have the option of cancelling or confirming the
     bargain unless they separate." The sub-narrator,
     Hammam said, "I found this in my book: 'Both
     the buyer and the seller give the option of either
     confirming or cancelling the bargain three times,
     and if they speak the truth and mention the
     defects, then their bargain will be blessed, and if
     they tell lies and conceal the defects, they might
     gain some financial gain but they will deprive their
     sale of (Allah's) blessings." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 328: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     A person came to the Prophet and told him that
     he was always betrayed in purchasing. The
     Prophet told him to say at the time of buying,
     "No cheating." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 329: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "An army will invade the
     Ka'ba and when the invaders reach Al-Baida', all
     the ground will sink and swallow the whole
     army." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! How will they
     sink into the ground while amongst them will be
     their markets (the people who worked in
     business and not invaders) and the people not
     belonging to them?" The Prophet replied, "all of
     those people will sink but they will be resurrected
     and judged according to their intentions." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 330: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The congregational prayer
     of anyone amongst you is more than twenty (five
     or twenty seven) times in reward than his prayer
     in the market or in his house, for if he performs
     ablution completely and then goes to the mosque
     with the sole intention of performing the prayer,
     and nothing urges him to proceed to the mosque
     except the prayer, then, on every step which he
     takes towards the mosque, he will be raised one
     degree or one of his sins will be forgiven. The
     angels will keep on asking Allah's forgiveness
     and blessings for everyone of you so long as he
     keeps sitting at his praying place. The angels will
     say, 'O Allah, bless him! O Allah, be merciful to
     him!' as long as he does not do Hadath or a thing
     which gives trouble to the other." The Prophet
     further said, "One is regarded in prayer so long
     as one is waiting for the prayer." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 331: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     While the Prophet was in the market, somebody,
     called, "O Abu-l-Qasim." The Prophet turned to
     him. The man said, "I have called to this (i.e.
     another man)." The Prophet said, "Name
     yourselves by my name but not by my Kuniya
     (name)." (In Arabic world it is the custom to call
     the man as the father of his eldest son, e.g.
     Abu-l-Qasim.) 

     (See Hadith No. 737, Vol. 4) 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 332: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     A man at Al-Baqi' called, "O Abu-l-Qasim!" The
     Prophet turned to him and the man said (to the
     Prophet ), "I did not intend to call you." The
     prophet said, "Name yourselves by my name but
     not by my kuniya (name)." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 333: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira Ad-Dausi: 

     Once the Prophet went out during the day.
     Neither did he talk to me nor I to him till he
     reached the market of Bani Qainuqa and then he
     sat in the compound of Fatima's house and asked
     about the small boy (his grandson Al-Hasan) but
     Fatima kept the boy in for a while. I thought she
     was either changing his clothes or giving the boy
     a bath. After a while the boy came out running
     and the Prophet embraced and kissed him and
     then said, 'O Allah! Love him, and love whoever
     loves him.' 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 334: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar told us that the people used to buy
     food from the caravans in the lifetime of the
     Prophet. The Prophet used to forbid them to sell
     it at the very place where they had purchased it
     (but they were to wait) till they carried it to the
     market where foodstuff was sold. Ibn 'Umar
     said, 'The Prophet also forbade the reselling of
     foodstuff by somebody who had bought it unless
     he had received it with exact full measure' 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 335: 

     Narrated Ata bin Yasar: 

     I met Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As and asked
     him, "Tell me about the description of Allah's
     Apostle which is mentioned in Torah (i.e. Old
     Testament.") He replied, 'Yes. By Allah, he is
     described in Torah with some of the qualities
     attributed to him in the Quran as follows: 

     "O Prophet ! We have sent you as a witness (for
     Allah's True religion) And a giver of glad tidings
     (to the faithful believers), And a warner (to the
     unbelievers) And guardian of the illiterates. You
     are My slave and My messenger (i.e. Apostle). I
     have named you "Al-Mutawakkil" (who depends
     upon Allah). You are neither discourteous, harsh
     Nor a noise-maker in the markets And you do
     not do evil to those Who do evil to you, but you
     deal With them with forgiveness and kindness.
     Allah will not let him (the Prophet) Die till he
     makes straight the crooked people by making
     them say: "None has the right to be worshipped
     but Allah," With which will be opened blind eyes
     And deaf ears and enveloped hearts." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 336: 

     Narrated Abdullah ibn Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "He who buys foodstuff
     should not sell it till he is satisfied with the
     measure with which he has bought it. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 337: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Haram died and was in
     debt to others. I asked the Prophet to intercede
     with his creditors for some reduction in the debts.
     The Prophet requested them (to reduce the
     debts) but they refused. The Prophet said to me,
     "Go and put your dates (In heaps) according to
     their different kinds. The Ajwa on one side, the
     cluster of Ibn Zaid on another side, etc.. Then
     call me." I did that and called the Prophet He
     came and sat at the head or in the middle of the
     heaps and ordered me. Measure (the dates) for
     the people (creditors)." I measured for them till I
     paid all the debts. My dates remained as it
     nothing had been taken from them. In other
     narrations, Jabir said; The Prophet said, "He (i.e.
     'Abdullah) continued measuring for them till he
     paid all the debts." The Prophet said (to
     'Abdullah), "Cut (clusters) for him (i.e. one of the
     creditors) and measure for him fully." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 338: 

     Narrated Al-Miqdam bin Ma'diyakrib: 

     The Prophet said, "Measure your foodstuff and
     you will be blessed." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 339: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid: 

     The Prophet said, "The Prophet Abraham made
     Mecca a sanctuary, and asked for Allah's
     blessing in it. I made Medina a sanctuary as
     Abraham made Mecca a sanctuary and I asked
     for Allah's Blessing in its measures the Mudd and
     the Sa as Abraham did for Mecca. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 340: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah bestow your
     blessings on their measures, bless their Mudd
     and Sa." The Prophet meant the people of
     Medina. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 341: 

     Narrated Salim: 

     that his father said. "I saw those, who used to
     buy foodstuff without measuring or weighing in
     the life time of the Prophet being punished if they
     sold it before carrying it to their own houses." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 342: 

     Narrated Tawus: 

     Ibn 'Abbas said, "Allah's Apostle forbade the
     selling of foodstuff before its measuring and
     transferring into one's possession." I asked Ibn
     'Abbas, "How is that?" Ibn 'Abbas replied, "It
     will be just like selling money for money, as the
     foodstuff has not been handed over to the first
     purchaser who is the present seller." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 343: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "He who buys foodstuff should
     not sell it till he has received it." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 344: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri from Malik bin Aus: 

     that the latter said, "Who has change?" Talha
     said, "I (will have change) when our store-keeper
     comes from the forest." 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: Allah's Apostle
     said, "The bartering of gold for silver is Riba,
     (usury), except if it is from hand to hand and
     equal in amount, and wheat grain for wheat grain
     is usury except if it is form hand to hand and
     equal in amount, and dates for dates is usury
     except if it is from hand to hand and equal in
     amount, and barley for barley is usury except if it
     is from hand to hand and equal in amount." (See
     Riba-Fadl in the glossary). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 345: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet forbade the selling of foodstuff
     before receiving it. I consider that all types of
     sellings should be done similarly. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 346: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "The buyer of foodstuff should
     not sell it before it has been measured for him."
     Isma'il narrated instead, "He should not sell it
     before receiving it." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 347: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     I saw the people buy foodstuff randomly (i.e.
     blindly without measuring it) in the life-time of
     Allah's Apostle and they were punished (by
     beating), if they tried to sell it before carrying it to
     their own houses. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 348: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Rarely did the Prophet fail to visit Abu Bakr's
     house everyday, either in the morning or in the
     evening. When the permission for migration to
     Medina was granted, all of a sudden the Prophet
     came to us at noon and Abu Bakr was informed,
     who said, "Certainly the Prophet has come for
     some urgent matter." The Prophet said to Abu
     Bark, when the latter entered "Let nobody stay in
     your home." Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     There are only my two daughters (namely 'Aisha
     and Asma') present." The Prophet said, "I feel
     (am informed) that I have been granted the
     permission for migration." Abu Bakr said, "I will
     accompany you, O Allah's Apostle!" The
     Prophet said, "You will accompany me." Abu
     Bakr then said "O Allah's Apostle! I have two
     she-camels I have prepared specially for
     migration, so I offer you one of them. The
     Prophet said, "I have accepted it on the condition
     that I will pay its price." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 349: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Do not urge somebody to
     return what he has already bought (i.e. in optional
     sale) from another seller so as to sell him your
     own goods." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 350: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of things by a
     town dweller on behalf of a desert dweller; and
     similarly Najsh was forbidden. And one should
     not urge somebody to return the goods to the
     seller so as to sell him his own goods; nor should
     one demand the hand of a girl who has already
     been engaged to someone else; and a woman
     should not try to cause some other woman to be
     divorced in order to take her place. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 351: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     A man decided that a slave of his would be
     manumitted after his death and later on he was in
     need of money, so the Prophet took the slave
     and said, "Who will buy this slave from me?"
     Nu'aim bin 'Abdullah bought him for such and
     such price and the Prophet gave him the slave. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 352: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade Najsh. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 353: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the sale called
     'Habal-al-Habala which was a kind of sale
     practiced in the Pre-lslamic Period of ignorance.
     One would pay the price of a she-camel which
     was not born yet would be born by the
     immediate offspring of an extant she-camel. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 354: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the selling by
     Munabadha, i.e. to sell one's garment by casting
     it to the buyer not allowing him to examine or see
     it. Similarly he forbade the selling by Mulamasa.
     Mulamasa is to buy a garment, for example, by
     merely touching it, not looking at it. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 355: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet forbade two kinds of dressing; (one
     of them) is to sit with one's legs drawn up while
     wrapped in one garment. (The other) is to lift that
     garment on one's shoulders. And also forbade
     two kinds of sale: Al-Limas and An-Nibadh. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 356: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     Allah's Apostle forbade selling by Mulamasa and
     Munabadha. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 357: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     The Prophet forbade two kinds of dresses and
     two kinds of sale, i.e., Mulamasa and
     Munabadha. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 358: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Don't keep camels and sheep
     unmilked for a long time, for whoever buys such
     an animal has the option to milk it and then either
     to keep it or return it to the owner along with one
     Sa of dates." Some narrated from Ibn Sirin (that
     the Prophet had said), "One Sa of wheat, and he
     has the option for three days." And some
     narrated from Ibn Sirin, " ... a Sa of dates," not
     mentioning the option for three days. But a Sa of
     dates is mentioned in most narrations. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 359: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud: 

     Whoever buys a sheep which has not been
     milked for a long time, has the option of returning
     it along with one Sa of dates; and the Prophet
     forbade going to meet the seller on the way (as
     he has no knowledge of the market price and he
     may sell his goods at a low price). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 360: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Do not go forward to meet
     the caravan (to buy from it on the way before it
     reaches the town). And do not urge buyers to
     cancel their purchases to sell them (your own
     goods) yourselves, and do not practice Najsh. A
     town dweller should not sell the goods for the
     desert dweller. Do not leave sheep unmilked for
     a long time, when they are on sale, and whoever
     buys such an animal has the option of returning it,
     after milking it, along with a Sa of dates or
     keeping it. it has been kept unmilked for a long
     period by the seller (to deceive others). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 361: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever buys a sheep
     which has been kept unmilked for a long period,
     and milks it, can keep it if he is satisfied, and if he
     is not satisfied, he can return it, but he should pay
     one Sa of dates for the milk." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 362: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "If a slave-girl commits illegal
     sexual intercourse and it is proved beyond doubt,
     then her owner should lash her and should not
     blame her after the legal punishment. And then if
     she repeats the illegal sexual intercourse he
     should lash her again and should not blame her
     after the legal punishment, and if she commits it a
     third time, then he should sell her even for a hair
     rope." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 363: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid: 

     Allah's Apostle was asked about the slave-girl, if
     she was a virgin and committed illegal sexual
     intercourse. The Prophet said, "If she committed
     illegal sexual intercourse, lash her, and if she did
     it a second time, then lash her again, and if she
     repeated the third time, then sell her even for a
     hair rope." Ibn Shihab said, "I don't know
     whether to sell her after the third or fourth
     offense." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 364: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle came to me and I told him about
     the slave-girl (Buraira) Allah's Apostle said, "Buy
     and manumit her, for the Wala is for the one who
     manumits." In the evening the Prophet got up and
     glorified Allah as He deserved and then said,
     "Why do some people impose conditions which
     are not present in Allah's Book (Laws)?
     Whoever imposes such a condition as is not in
     Allah's Laws, then that condition is invalid even if
     he imposes one hundred conditions, for Allah's
     conditions are more binding and reliable." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 365: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Aisha wanted to buy Buraira and he (the Prophet
     ) went out for the prayer. When he returned, she
     told him that they (her masters) refused to sell her
     except on the condition that her Wala' would go
     to them. The Prophet replied, 'The Wala' would
     go to him who manumits.' " Hammam asked
     Nafi' whether her (Buraira's) husband was a free
     man or a slave. He replied that he did not know. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 366: 

     Narrated Jarir: 

     I have given a pledge of allegiance to Allah's
     Apostle for to testify that None has the right to
     be worshipped but Allah, and Muhammad is His
     Apostle, to offer prayers perfectly, to pay Zakat,
     to listen to and obey (Allah's and His Prophet's
     orders), and to give good advice to every
     Muslim. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 367: 

     Narrated Tawus: 

     Ibn 'Abbas said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'Do not
     go to meet the caravans on the way (for buying
     their goods without letting them know the market
     price); a town dweller should not sell the goods
     of a desert dweller on behalf of the latter.' I
     asked Ibn 'Abbas, 'What does he mean by not
     selling the goods of a desert dweller by a town
     dweller?' He said, 'He should not become his
     broker.' " 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 368: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of the goods
     of a desert dweller by a town person. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 369: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A buyer should not urge a
     seller to restore a purchase so as to buy it
     himself, and do not practice Najsh; and a town
     dweller should not sell goods of a desert
     dweller." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 370: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     We were forbidden that a town dweller should
     sell goods of a desert dweller. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 371: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet forbade the meeting (of caravans)
     on the way and the selling of goods by an
     inhabitant of the town on behalf of a desert
     dweller. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 372: 

     Narrated Tawus: 

     I asked Ibn 'Abbas, "What is the meaning of,
     'No town dweller should sell (or buy) for a
     desert dweller'?" Ibn 'Abbas said, "It means he
     should not become his broker." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 373: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     Whoever buys an animal which has been kept
     unmilked for a long time, could return it, but has
     to pay a Sa of dates along with it. And the
     Prophet forbade meeting the owners of goods on
     the way away from the market. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 374: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "You should not try to
     cancel the purchases of one another (to get a
     benefit thereof), and do not go ahead to meet the
     caravan (for buying the goods) (but wait) till it
     reaches the market." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 375: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     We used to go ahead to meet the caravan and
     used to buy foodstuff from them. The Prophet
     forbade us to sell it till it was carried to the
     market. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 376: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     Some people used to buy foodstuff at the head
     of the market and used to sell it on the spot.
     Allah's Apostle forbade them to sell it till they
     brought it to (their) places. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 377: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     Aisha said, "Buraira came to me and said, 'I have
     agreed with my masters to pay them nine Uqiyas
     (of gold) (in installments) one Uqiya per year;
     please help me.' I said, 'I am ready to pay the
     whole amount now provided your masters agree
     that your Wala will be for me.' So, Buraira went
     to her masters and told them about that offer but
     they refused to accept it. She returned, and at
     that time, Allah's Apostle was sitting (present).
     Buraira said, 'I told them of the offer but they did
     not accept it and insisted on having the Wala.'.'
     The Prophet heard that." 'Aisha narrated the
     whole story to the Prophet . He said to her, "Buy
     her and stipulate that her Wala' would be yours
     as the Wala' is for the manumitted." 'Aisha did
     so. Then Allah's Apostle stood up in front of the
     people, and after glorifying Allah he said, "Amma
     Badu (i.e. then after)! What about the people
     who impose conditions which are not in Allah's
     Book (Laws)? Any condition that is not in Allah's
     Book (Laws) is invalid even if they were one
     hundred conditions, for Allah's decisions are the
     right ones and His conditions are the strong ones
     (firmer) and the Wala' will be for the
     manumitted." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 378: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Aisha, (mother of the faithful believers) wanted to
     buy a slave girl and manumit her, but her masters
     said that they would sell her only on the condition
     that her Wala' would be for them. 'Aisha told
     Allah's Apostle of that. He said, "What they
     stipulate should not hinder you from buying her,
     as the Wala' is for the manumitted." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 379: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "The selling of wheat for wheat
     is Riba (usury) except if it is handed from hand to
     hand and equal in amount. Similarly the selling of
     barley for barley, is Riba except if it is from hand
     to hand and equal in amount, and dates for dates
     is usury except if it is from hand to hand and
     equal in amount. (See Riba-Fadl in the glossary).


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 380: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade Muzabana; and
     Muzabana is the selling of fresh dates for dried
     old dates by measure, and the selling of fresh
     grapes for dried grapes by measure. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 381: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet forbade Muzabana; and Muzabana
     is the selling of fresh fruit (without measuring it)
     for something by measure on the basis that if that
     thing turns to be more than the fruit, the increase
     would be for the seller of the fruit, and if it turns
     to be less, that would be of his lot. 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar from Zaid bin Thabit that the
     Prophet allowed the selling of the fruits on the
     trees after estimation (when they are ripe). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 382: 

     Narrated Ibn Shihab: 

     that Malik bin Aus said, "I was in need of change
     for one-hundred Dinars. Talha bin 'Ubaid-Ullah
     called me and we discussed the matter, and he
     agreed to change (my Dinars). He took the gold
     pieces in his hands and fidgeted with them, and
     then said, "Wait till my storekeeper comes from
     the forest." 'Umar was listening to that and said,
     "By Allah! You should not separate from Talha
     till you get the money from him, for Allah's
     Apostle said, 'The selling of gold for gold is Riba
     (usury) except if the exchange is from hand to
     hand and equal in amount, and similarly, the
     selling of wheat for wheat is Riba (usury) unless it
     is from hand to hand and equal in amount, and
     the selling of barley for barley is usury unless it is
     from hand to hand and equal in amount, and
     dates for dates, is usury unless it is from hand to
     hand and equal in amount" 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 383: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Don't sell gold for gold
     unless equal in weight, nor silver for silver unless
     equal in weight, but you could sell gold for silver
     or silver for gold as you like." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 384: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     (Concerning exchange) that he heard Allah's
     Apostle saying, "Do not sell gold for gold unless
     equal in weight, and do not sell silver unless equal
     in weight." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 385: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Do not sell gold for gold
     unless equivalent in weight, and do not sell less
     amount for greater amount or vice versa; and do
     not sell silver for silver unless equivalent in
     weight, and do not sell less amount for greater
     amount or vice versa and do not sell gold or
     silver that is not present at the moment of
     exchange for gold or silver that is present. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 386: 

     Narrated Abu Salih Az-Zaiyat: 

     I heard Abu Said Al-Khudri saying, "The selling
     of a Dinar for a Dinar, and a Dirham for a
     Dirham (is permissible)." I said to him, "Ibn
     'Abbas does not say the same." Abu Said
     replied, "I asked Ibn 'Abbas whether he had
     heard it from the Prophet s or seen it in the Holy
     Book. Ibn 'Abbas replied, "I do not claim that,
     and you know Allah's Apostle better than I, but
     Usama informed me that the Prophet had said,
     'There is no Riba (in money exchange) except
     when it is not done from hand to hand (i.e. when
     there is delay in payment).' " 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 387: 

     Narrated Abu Al-Minhal: 

     I asked Al-Bara' bin 'Azib and Zaid bin Arqam
     about money exchanges. Each of them said,
     "This is better than I," and both of them said,
     "Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of silver for
     gold on credit. " 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 388: 

     Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakra: 

     that his father said, "The Prophet forbade the
     selling of gold for gold and silver for silver except
     if they are equivalent in weight, and allowed us to
     sell gold for silver and vice versa as we wished." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 389: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Do not sell fruits of dates
     until they become free from all the dangers of
     being spoilt or blighted; and do not sell fresh
     dates for dry dates." 

     Narrated Salim and 'Abdullah from Zaid bin
     Habit' "Later on Allah's Apostle permitted the
     selling of ripe fruits on trees for fresh dates or
     dried dates in Bai'-l-'Araya, and did not allow it
     for any other kind of sale." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 390: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade Muzabana; and
     Muzabana means the selling of fresh dates (on
     the trees) for dried dates by measure and also
     the selling of fresh grapes for dried grapes by
     measure. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 391: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade Muzabana and
     Muhaqala; and Muzabana means the selling of
     ripe dates for dates still on the trees. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 392: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet forbade Muzabana and Muhaqala. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 393: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Thabit: 

     Allah's Apostle al lowed the owner of 'Araya to
     sell the fruits on the trees by means of estimation.


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 394: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet forbade the selling of fruits unless
     they get ripe, and none of them should be sold
     except for Dinar or Dirham (i.e. money), except
     the 'Araya trees (the dates of which could be
     sold for dates). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 395: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet allowed the sale of the dates of
     'Araya provided they were about five Awsuq
     (singular: Wasaq which means sixty Sa's) or less
     (in amount). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 396: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Abu Hathma: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of fruits (fresh
     dates) for dried dates but allowed the sale of
     fruits on the 'Araya by estimation and their new
     owners might eat their dates fresh. Sufyan (in
     another narration) said, "I told Yahya (a
     sub-narrator) when I was a mere boy, 'Meccans
     say that the Prophet allowed them the sale of the
     fruits on 'Araya by estimation.' Yahya asked,
     'How do the Meccans know about it?' I replied,
     'They narrated it (from the Prophet ) through
     Jabir.' On that, Yahya kept quiet." Sufyan said, "I
     meant that Jabir belonged to Medina." Sufyan
     was asked whether in Jabir's narration there was
     any prohibition of selling fruits before their benefit
     is evident (i.e. no dangers of being spoilt or
     blighted). He replied that there was none. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 397: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar from Zaid bin Thabit: 

     Allah's Apostle allowed the sale of 'Araya by
     estimating the dates on them for measured
     amounts of dried dates. Musa bin 'Uqba said,
     "Al- 'Araya were distinguished date palms; one
     could come and buy them (i.e. their fruits)." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 398: 

     Narrated Zaid: 

     Same as above (Hadith 397). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 399: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the sale of fruits till their
     benefit is evident. He forbade both the seller and
     the buyer (such sale). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 400: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the sale of date fruits till
     they were ripe. Abu 'Abdullah (Al-Bukhari) said,
     "That means till they were red (can be eaten)." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 401: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet forbade the s of (date) fruits till they
     were red or yellow and fit for eating. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 402: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet forbade the sale of fruits till their
     benefit is evident; and the sale of date palms till
     the dates are almost ripe. He was asked what
     'are almost ripe' meant. He replied, "Got red and
     yellow." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 403: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the sale of fruits till they
     are almost ripe. He was asked what is meant by
     'are almost ripe.' He replied, "Till they become
     red." Allah's Apostle further said, "If Allah
     spoiled the fruits, what right would one have to
     take the money of one's brother (i.e. other
     people)?" 

     Narrated Ibn Shihab: If somebody bought fruits
     before their benefit is evident and then the fruits
     were spoiled with blights, the loss would be
     suffered by the owner (not the buyer). 

     Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah from Ibn Umar:
     Allah's Apostle said, "Do not sell or buy fruits
     before their benefit was evident and do not sell
     fresh fruits (dates) for dried dates." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 404: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet bought some foodstuff from a Jew
     on credit and mortgaged his armor to him. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 405: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri and Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle appointed somebody as a
     governor of Khaibar. That governor brought to
     him an excellent kind of dates (from Khaibar).
     The Prophet asked, "Are all the dates of Khaibar
     like this?" He replied, "By Allah, no, O Allah's
     Apostle! But we barter one Sa of this (type of
     dates) for two Sas of dates of ours and two Sas
     of it for three of ours." Allah's Apostle said, "Do
     not do so (as that is a kind of usury) but sell the
     mixed dates (of inferior quality) for money, and
     then buy good dates with that money." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 406: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If somebody sells
     pollinated date palms, the fruits will be for the
     seller unless the buyer stipulates that they will be
     for himself (and the seller agrees)." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 407: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Muzabana, i.e. to sell
     ungathered dates of one's garden for measured
     dried dates or fresh ungathered grapes for
     measured dried grapes; or standing crops for
     measured quantity of foodstuff. He forbade all
     such bargains. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 408: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever pollinates date
     palms and then sells them, the fruits will belong to
     him unless the buyer stipulates that the fruits
     should belong to him (and the seller agrees)." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 409: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade Muhaqala, Mukhadara,
     Mulamasa, Munabadha and Muzabana. (See
     glossary and previous Hadiths for the meanings
     of these terms.) 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 410: 

     Narrated Humaid: 

     Anas said, "The Prophet forbade the selling of
     dates till they were almost ripe." We asked Anas,
     "What does 'almost ripe' mean?" He replied,
     "They get red and yellow. The Prophet added, 'If
     Allah destroyed the fruits present on the trees,
     what right would the seller have to take the
     money of his brother (somebody else)?' " 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 411: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     I was with the Prophet while he was eating
     spadix. He said, "From the trees there is a tree
     which resembles a faithful believer." I wanted to
     say that it was the date palm, but I was the
     youngest among them (so I kept quiet). He
     added, "It is the date palm." Shuraih told the
     weavers, "You are permitted to follow your own
     conventions to solve your problems (it is legal for
     you to stick to your traditions in bargain) . " 

     Narrated 'Abdul Wahab: Aiyub said:
     Muhammad said, "There is no harm in selling for
     eleven what you buy for ten, and you are allowed
     to take a profit for expenses . " 

     The Prophet told Hind, "Take what is reasonable
     and sufficient for you and your sons." Allah says:
     Whoever is poor, can eat (from the orphan's
     property) reasonably (according to his labors). 

     Al-Hasan hired a donkey from 'Abdullah bin
     Mirdas and asked him about the hire. The latter
     replied that it was for two Daniqs (a Daniq
     equals 116th Dirham). So Al-Hasan rode away.
     Another time, Al-Hasan came to 'Abdullah bin
     Mirdas and asked him to hire the donkey to him
     and rode away without asking him about the hire,
     but he sent him half a Dirham. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 412: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Abu Taiba cupped Allah's Apostle and so Allah's
     Apostle ordered that a Sa of dates be paid to
     him and ordered his masters (for he was a slave)
     to reduce his tax. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 413: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Hind, the mother of Mu'awiya said to Allah's
     Apostle, "Abu Sufyan (her husband) is a miser.
     Am I allowed to take from his money secretly?"
     The Prophet said to her, "You and your sons
     may take what is sufficient reasonably and fairly."


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 414: 

     Narrated Hisham bin 'Urwa from his father: 

     who heard Aisha saying, "The Holy Verse;
     'Whoever amongst the guardians is rich, he
     should take no wages (from the property of the
     orphans) but If he is poor, let him have for
     himself what is just and reasonable (according to
     his labors)' (4.6) was revealed concerning the
     guardian of the orphans who looks after them
     and manages favorably their financial affairs; If
     the guardian Is poor, he could have from It what
     Is just and reasonable, (according to his labors)."


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 415: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Allah's Apostle gave pre-emption (to the partner)
     in every joint property, but if the boundaries of
     the property were demarcated or the ways and
     streets were fixed, then there was no
     pre-emption. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 416: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle decided the validity of
     pre-emption in every joint undivided property,
     but if the boundaries were well marked or the
     ways and streets were fixed, then there was no
     pre-emption. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 417: 

     Narrated Mussaddad from 'Abdul Wahid: 

     the same as above but said, "... in every joint
     undivided thing..." Narrated Hisham from
     Ma'mar the same as above but said, " ... in every
     property... " 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 418: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "While three persons were
     walking, rain began to fall and they had to enter a
     cave in a mountain. A big rock rolled over and
     blocked the mouth of the cave. They said to each
     other, 'Invoke Allah with the best deed you have
     performed (so Allah might remove the rock)'.
     One of them said, 'O Allah! My parents were old
     and I used to go out for grazing (my animals). On
     my return I would milk (the animals) and take the
     milk in a vessel to my parents to drink. After they
     had drunk from it, I would give it to my children,
     family and wife. One day I was delayed and on
     my return I found my parents sleeping, and I
     disliked to wake them up. The children were
     crying at my feet (because of hunger). That state
     of affairs continued till it was dawn. O Allah! If
     You regard that I did it for Your sake, then
     please remove this rock so that we may see the
     sky.' So, the rock was moved a bit. The second
     said, 'O Allah! You know that I was in love with
     a cousin of mine, like the deepest love a man
     may have for a woman, and she told me that I
     would not get my desire fulfilled unless I paid her
     one-hundred Dinars (gold pieces). So, I
     struggled for it till I gathered the desired amount,
     and when I sat in between her legs, she told me
     to be afraid of Allah, and asked me not to
     deflower her except rightfully (by marriage). So,
     I got up and left her. O Allah! If You regard that
     I did if for Your sake, kindly remove this rock.'
     So, two-thirds of the rock was removed. Then
     the third man said, 'O Allah! No doubt You
     know that once I employed a worker for one
     Faraq (three Sa's) of millet, and when I wanted
     to pay him, he refused to take it, so I sowed it
     and from its yield I bought cows and a shepherd.
     After a time that man came and demanded his
     money. I said to him: Go to those cows and the
     shepherd and take them for they are for you. He
     asked me whether I was joking with him. I told
     him that I was not joking with him, and all that
     belonged to him. O Allah! If You regard that I
     did it sincerely for Your sake, then please
     remove the rock.' So, the rock was removed
     completely from the mouth of the cave." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 419: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr: 

     We were with the Prophet when a tall pagan with
     long matted unkempt hair came driving his sheep.
     The Prophet asked him, "Are those sheep for
     sale or for gifts?" The pagan replied, "They are
     for sale." The Prophet bought one sheep from
     him. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 420: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The Prophet Abraham
     emigrated with Sarah and entered a village where
     there was a king or a tyrant. (The king) was told
     that Abraham had entered (the village)
     accompanied by a woman who was one of the
     most charming women. So, the king sent for
     Abraham and asked, 'O Abraham! Who is this
     lady accompanying you?' Abraham replied, 'She
     is my sister (i.e. in religion).' Then Abraham
     returned to her and said, 'Do not contradict my
     statement, for I have informed them that you are
     my sister. By Allah, there are no true believers on
     this land except you and 1.' Then Abraham sent
     her to the king. When the king got to her, she got
     up and performed ablution, prayed and said, 'O
     Allah! If I have believed in You and Your
     Apostle, and have saved my private parts from
     everybody except my husband, then please do
     not let this pagan overpower me.' On that the
     king fell in a mood of agitation and started
     moving his legs. Seeing the condition of the king,
     Sarah said, 'O Allah! If he should die, the people
     will say that I have killed him.' The king regained
     his power, and proceeded towards her but she
     got up again and performed ablution, prayed and
     said, 'O Allah! If I have believed in You and
     Your Apostle and have kept my private parts
     safe from all except my husband, then please do
     not let this pagan overpower me.' The king again
     fell in a mood of agitation and started moving his
     legs. On seeing that state of the king, Sarah said,
     'O Allah! If he should die, the people will say that
     I have killed him.' The king got either two or
     three attacks, and after recovering from the last
     attack he said, 'By Allah! You have sent a satan
     to me. Take her to Abraham and give her Ajar.'
     So she came back to Abraham and said, 'Allah
     humiliated the pagan and gave us a slavegirl for
     service." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 421: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Sad bin Abi Waqqas and 'Abu bin Zam'a
     quarreled over a boy. Sad said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! This boy is the son of my brother ('Utba
     bin Abi Waqqas) who took a promise from me
     that I would take him as he was his (illegal) son.
     Look at him and see whom he resembles." 'Abu
     bin Zam'a said, "O Allah's Apostle! This is my
     brother and was born on my father's bed from
     his slave-girl." Allah's Apostle cast a look at the
     boy and found definite resemblance to 'Utba and
     then said, "The boy is for you, O 'Abu bin Zam'a.
     The child goes to the owner of the bed and the
     adulterer gets nothing but the stones (despair, i.e.
     to be stoned to death). Then the Prophet said,
     "O Sauda bint Zama! Screen yourself from this
     boy." So, Sauda never saw him again. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 422: 

     Narrated Sad that his father said: 

     Abdur-Rahman bin Auf said to Suhaib, 'Fear
     Allah and do not ascribe yourself to somebody
     other than your father.' Suhaib replied, 'I would
     not like to say it even if I were given large
     amounts of money, but I say I was kidnapped in
     my childhood.' " 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 423: 

     Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 

     Hakim bin Hizam said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
     used to do good deeds in the Pre-lslamic period
     of Ignorance, e.g., keeping good relations with
     my Kith and kin, manumitting slaves and giving
     alms. Shall I receive a reward for all that?"
     Allah's Apostle replied, "You embraced Islam
     with all the good deeds which you did in the
     past." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 424: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     Once Allah's Apostle passed by a dead sheep
     and said to the people, "Wouldn't you benefit by
     its skin?" The people replied that it was dead.
     The Prophet said, "But its eating only is illegal." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 425: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hands
     my soul is, son of Mary (Jesus) will shortly
     descend amongst you people (Muslims) as a just
     ruler and will break the Cross and kill the pig and
     abolish the Jizya (a tax taken from the
     non-Muslims, who are in the protection, of the
     Muslim government). Then there will be
     abundance of money and no-body will accept
     charitable gifts. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 426: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once 'Umar was informed that a certain man
     sold alcohol. 'Umar said, "May Allah curse him!
     Doesn't he know that Allah's Apostle said, 'May
     Allah curse the Jews, for Allah had forbidden
     them to eat the fat of animals but they melted it
     and sold it." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 427: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "May Allah curse the Jews,
     because Allah made fat illegal for them but they
     sold it and ate its price. " 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 428: 

     Narrated Said bin Abu Al-Hasan: 

     While I was with Ibn 'Abbas a man came and
     said, "O father of 'Abbas! My sustenance is from
     my manual profession and I make these
     pictures." Ibn 'Abbas said, "I will tell you only
     what I heard from Allah's Apostle . I heard him
     saying, 'Whoever makes a picture will be
     punished by Allah till he puts life in it, and he will
     never be able to put life in it.' " Hearing this, that
     man heaved a sigh and his face turned pale. Ibn
     'Abbas said to him, "What a pity! If you insist on
     making pictures I advise you to make pictures of
     trees and any other unanimated objects." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 429: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When the last verses of Surat-al-Baqara were
     revealed, the Prophet went out (of his house to
     the Mosque) and said, "The trade of alcohol has
     become illegal." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 430: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah says, 'I will be against
     three persons on the Day of Resurrection: 

     1. One who makes a covenant in My Name, but
     he proves treacherous. 

     2. One who sells a free person (as a slave) and
     eats the price, 

     3. And one who employs a laborer and gets the
     full work done by him but does not pay him his
     wages.' " 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 431: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Amongst the captives was Safiya. First she was
     given to Dihya Al-Kalbi and then to the Prophet. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 432: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     that while he was sitting with Allah's Apostle he
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! We get female captives
     as our share of booty, and we are interested in
     their prices, what is your opinion about coitus
     interrupt us?" The Prophet said, "Do you really
     do that? It is better for you not to do it. No soul
     that which Allah has destined to exist, but will
     surely come into existence. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 433: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet sold a Mudabbar (on behalf of his
     master who was still living and in need of
     money). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 434: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle sold a Mudabbar. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 435: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid and Abu Huraira: 

     that Allah's Apostle was asked about an
     unmarried slave-girl who committed illegal sexual
     intercourse. They heard him saying, "Flog her,
     and if she commits illegal sexual intercourse after
     that, flog her again, and on the third (or the
     fourth) offense, sell her." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 436: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "If a slave-girl of
     yours commits illegal sexual intercourse and her
     illegal sexual intercourse is proved, she should be
     lashed, and after that nobody should blame her,
     and if she commits illegal sexual intercourse the
     second time, she should be lashed and nobody
     should blame her after that, and if she does the
     offense for the third time and her illegal sexual
     intercourse is proved, she should be sold even
     for a hair rope." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 437: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet came to Khaibar and when Allah
     made him victorious and he conquered the town
     by breaking the enemy's defense, the beauty of
     Safiya bint Huyai bin Akhtab was mentioned to
     him and her husband had been killed while she
     was a bride. Allah's Apostle selected her for
     himself and he set out in her company till he
     reached Sadd-ar-Rawha' where her menses
     were over and he married her. Then Hais (a kind
     of meal) was prepared and served on a small
     leather sheet (used for serving meals). Allah's
     Apostle then said to me, "Inform those who are
     around you (about the wedding banquet)." So
     that was the marriage banquet given by Allah's
     Apostle for (his marriage with) Safiya. After that
     we proceeded to Medina and I saw that Allah's
     Apostle was covering her with a cloak while she
     was behind him. Then he would sit beside his
     camel and let Safiya put her feet on his knees to
     ride (the camel). 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 438: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle, in the year of the
     Conquest of Mecca, saying, "Allah and His
     Apostle made illegal the trade of alcohol, dead
     animals, pigs and idols." The people asked, "O
     Allah's Apostle! What about the fat of dead
     animals, for it was used for greasing the boats
     and the hides; and people use it for lights?" He
     said, "No, it is illegal." Allah's Apostle further
     said, "May Allah curse the Jews, for Allah made
     the fat (of animals) illegal for them, yet they
     melted the fat and sold it and ate its price." 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 439: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade taking the price of a dog,
     money earned by prostitution and the earnings of
     a soothsayer. 


Volume 3, Book 34, Number 440: 

     Narrated Aun bin Abu Juhaifa: 

     I saw my father buying a slave whose profession
     was cupping, and ordered that his instruments (of
     cupping) be broken. I asked him the reason for
     doing so. He replied, "Allah's Apostle prohibited
     taking money for blood, the price of a dog, and
     the earnings of a slave-girl by prostitution; he
     cursed her who tattoos and her who gets
     tattooed, the eater of Riba (usury), and the
     maker of pictures." 
 
Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 35: 

    Sales in which a Price is
       paid for Goods to be
 Delivered Later (As-Salam) 



Volume 3, Book 35, Number 441: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle came to Medina and the people
     used to pay in advance the price of fruits to be
     delivered within one or two years. (The
     sub-narrator is in doubt whether it was one to
     two years or two to three years.) The Prophet
     said, "Whoever pays money in advance for dates
     (to be delivered later) should pay it for known
     specified weight and measure (of the dates)." 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 442: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Najih: 

     as above, mentioning only specific measure. 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 443: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet came to Medina and the people
     used to pay in advance the price of dates to be
     delivered within two or three years. He said (to
     them), "Whoever pays in advance the price of a
     thing to be delivered later should pay it for a
     specified measure at specified weight for a
     specified period." 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 444: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Najih: 

     as above, saying, "He should pay the price in
     advance for a specified measure and for a
     specified period." 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 445: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet came (to Medina) and he told the
     people (regarding the payment of money in
     advance that they should pay it) for a known
     specified measure and a known specified weight
     and a known specified period. 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 446: 

     Narrated Shu'ba: 

     Muhammad or 'Abdullah bin Abu Al-Mujalid
     said, "Abdullah bin Shaddad and Abu Burda
     differed regarding As-Salam, so they sent me to
     Ibn Abi Aufa and I asked him about it. He
     replied, 'In the life-time of Allah's Apostle, Abu
     Bakr and 'Umar, we used to pay in advance the
     prices of wheat, barley, dried grapes and dates
     to be delivered later. I also asked Ibn Abza and
     he, too, replied as above.' " 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 447: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Majalid: 

     Abdullah bin Shaddad and Abu Burda sent me
     to 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa and told me to ask
     'Abdullah whether the people in the life-time of
     the Prophet used to pay in advance for wheat (to
     be delivered later). Abdullah replied, "We used
     to pay in advance to the peasants of Sham for
     wheat, barley and olive oil of a known specified
     measure to be delivered in a specified period." I
     asked (him), "Was the price paid (in advance) to
     those who had the things to be delivered later?"
     Abdullah bin Aufa replied, "We did not use to
     ask them about that." Then they sent me to
     'Abdur Rahman bin Abza and I asked him. He
     replied, "The companions of the Prophet used to
     practice Salam in the life-time of the Prophet;
     and we did not use to ask them whether they had
     standing crops or not." 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 448: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Abi Al-Mujalid: 

     as above (446) and said, "We used to pay them
     in advance for wheat and barley (to be delivered
     later). Narrated Ash-Shaibani--"And also for
     oil." 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 449: 

     Narrated Ash-Shaibani: 

     who said "We used to pay in advance for wheat
     barley and dried grapes." 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 450: 

     Narrated Abu Bakhtari At-Tai: 

     I asked Ibn 'Abbas about Salam for (the fruits
     of) date-palms. He replied "The Prophet forbade
     the sale a dates on the trees till they became fit
     for eating and could be weighed." A man asked
     what to be weighed (as the dates were still on the
     trees). Another man sitting beside Ibn 'Abbas
     replied, "Till they are cut and stored." Narrated
     Abu Al-Bakhtari: I heard Ibn Abbas (saying) that
     the Prophet forbade ... etc. as above. 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 451: 

     Narrated Abu Al-Bakhtari: 

     I asked Ibn Umar about Salam (the fruits of)
     date-palms. He replied, "The Prophet forbade
     the sale of dates till their benefit becomes evident
     and fit for eating and also the sale of silver (for
     gold) on credit." I asked Ibn 'Abbas about Salam
     for dates and he replied, "The Prophet forbade
     the sale of dates till they were fit for eating and
     could be estimated." 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 452: 

     Narrated Abu Al-Bakhtari: 

     I asked Ibn 'Umar about Salam for dates. Ibn
     'Umar replied, "The Prophet forbade the sale
     (the fruits) of datepalms until they were fit for
     eating and also forbade the sale of silver for gold
     on credit." I also asked Ibn 'Abbas about it. Ibn
     'Abbas replied, "The Prophet forbade the sale of
     dates till they were fit for eating, and could be
     weighed." I asked him, "What is to be weighed
     (as the dates are on the trees)?" A man sitting by
     Ibn 'Abbas said, "It means till they are cut and
     stored." 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 453: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle bought some foodstuff (barley)
     from a Jew on credit and mortgaged his iron
     armor to him (the armor stands for a guarantor). 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 454: 

     Narrated Al-A'mash: 

     We argued at Ibrahim's dwelling place about
     mortgaging in Salam. He said, "Aisha said, 'The
     Prophet bought some foodstuff from a Jew on
     credit and the payment was to be made by a
     definite period, and he mortgaged his iron armor
     to him." 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 455: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet came to Medina and the people
     used to pay in advance the prices of fruits to be
     delivered within two to three years. The Prophet
     said (to them), "Buy fruits by paying their prices
     in advance on condition that the fruits are to be
     delivered to you according to a fixed specified
     measure within a fixed specified period." Ibn
     Najih said, " ... by specified measure and
     specified weight." 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 456: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Abi Al-Mujalid: 

     Abu Burda and 'Abdullah bin Shaddad sent me
     to 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza and 'Abdullah bin
     Abi Aufa to ask them about the Salaf (Salam).
     They said, "We used to get war booty while we
     were with Allah's Apostle and when the peasants
     of Sham came to us we used to pay them in
     advance for wheat, barley, and oil to be
     delivered within a fixed period." I asked them,
     "Did the peasants own standing crops or not?"
     They replied, "We never asked them about it." 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 457: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The people used to sell camels on the basis of
     Habal-al-Habala. The Prophet forbade such
     sale. Nafi' explained Habalal-Habala by saying.
     "The camel is to be delivered to the buyer after
     the she-camel gives birth." 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 458: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle gave a verdict regarding Shuf'a in
     every undivided joint thing (property). But if the
     limits are defined (or demarcated) or the ways
     and streets are fixed, then there is no
     pre-emption. 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 459: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Ash-Sharid: 

     While I was standing with Sad bin Abi Waqqas,
     Al-Miswar bin Makhrama came and put his hand
     on my shoulder. Meanwhile Abu Rafi', the freed
     slave of the Prophet came and asked Sad to buy
     from him the (two) dwellings which were in his
     house. Sad said, "By Allah I will not buy them."
     Al-Miswar said, "By Allah, you shall buy them."
     Sad replied, "By Allah, I will not pay more than
     four thousand (Dirhams) by installments." Abu
     Rafi' said, "I have been offered five hundred
     Dinars (for it) and had I not heard the Prophet
     saying, 'The neighbor has more right than anyone
     else because of his nearness, I would not give
     them to you for four-thousand (Dirhams) while I
     am offered five-hundred Dinars (one Dinar
     equals ten Dirhams) for them." So, he sold it to
     Sad. 


Volume 3, Book 35, Number 460: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have two neighbors
     and would like to know to which of them I
     should give presents." He replied, "To the one
     whose door is nearer to you." 


 Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 36: 

                  Hiring 



Volume 3, Book 36, Number 461: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari: 

     The Prophet said, "The honest treasurer who
     gives willingly what he is ordered to give, is one
     of the two charitable persons, (the second being
     the owner)." 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 462: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     I went to the Prophet with two men from Ash-ari
     tribe. I said (to the Prophet), "I do not know that
     they want employment." The Prophet said, "No,
     we do not appoint for our jobs anybody who
     demands it earnestly." 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 463: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah did not send any
     prophet but shepherded sheep." His companions
     asked him, "Did you do the same?" The Prophet
     replied, "Yes, I used to shepherd the sheep of
     the people of Mecca for some Qirats." 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 464: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet and Abu Bakr employed a (pagan)
     man from the tribe of Bani Ad-Dail and the tribe
     of Bani 'Abu bin 'Adi as a guide. He was an
     expert guide and he broke the oath contract
     which he had to abide by with the tribe of Al-'Asi
     bin Wail and he was on the religion of Quraish
     pagans. The Prophet and Abu Bakr had
     confidence in him and gave him their riding
     camels and told him to bring them to the Cave of
     Thaur after three days. So, he brought them their
     two riding camels after three days and both of
     them (The Prophet and Abu Bakr) set out
     accompanied by 'Amir bin Fuhaira and the Dili
     guide who guided them below Mecca along the
     road leading to the sea-shore. 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 465: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle and
     Abu Bakr hired a man from the tribe of
     Bani-Ad-Dil as an expert guide who was a
     pagan (follower of the religion of the pagans of
     Quraish). The Prophet and Abu Bakr gave him
     their two riding camels and took a promise from
     him to bring their riding camels in the morning of
     the third day to the Cave of Thaur. 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 466: 

     Narrated Ya'la bin Umaya: 

     I fought in Jaish-al-Usra (Ghazwa of Tabuk)
     along with the Prophet and in my opinion that
     was the best of my deeds. Then I had an
     employee, who quarrel led with someone and
     one of the them bit and cut the other's finger and
     caused his own tooth to fall out. He then went to
     the Prophet (with a complaint) but the Prophet
     cancelled the suit and said to the complainant,
     "Did you expect him to let his finger in your
     mouth so that you might snap and cut it (as does
     a stallion camel)?" 

     Narrated Ibn Juraij from Abdullah bin Abu
     Mulaika from his grandfather a similar story: A
     man bit the hand of another man and caused his
     own tooth to fall out, but Abu Bakr judged that
     he had no right for compensation (for the broken
     tooth). 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 467: 

     Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Both of them (Moses and
     Al-Khadir) proceeded on till they reached a wall
     which was about to fall." Sa'd said, "(Al-Khadir
     pointed) with his hands (towards the wall) and
     then raised his hands and the wall became
     straightened up." Ya'la said, "I think Said said,
     'He (Khadir) passed his hand over it and it was
     straightened up." (Moses said to him), "if you had
     wanted, you could have taken wages for it." Said
     said, "Wages with which to buy food . " 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 468: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "Your example and the
     example of the people of the two Scriptures (i.e.
     Jews and Christians) is like the example of a man
     who employed some laborers and asked them,
     'Who will work for me from morning till midday
     for one Qirat?' The Jews accepted and carried
     out the work. He then asked, Who will work for
     me from midday up to the 'Asr prayer for one
     Qirat?' The Christians accepted and fulfilled the
     work. He then said, 'Who will work for me from
     the 'Asr till sunset for two Qirats?' You, Muslims
     have accepted the offer. The Jews and the
     Christians got angry and said, 'Why should we
     work more and get lesser wages?' (Allah) said,
     'Have I with-held part of your right?' They
     replied in the negative. He said, 'It is My
     Blessing, I bestow upon whomever I wish .' 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 469: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Your example and the
     example of Jews and Christians is like the
     example of a man who employed some laborers
     to whom he said, 'Who will work for me up to
     midday for one Qirat each?' The Jews carried
     out the work for one Qirat each; and then the
     Christians carried out the work up to the 'Asr
     prayer for one Qirat each; and now you Muslims
     are working from the 'Asr prayer up to sunset for
     two Qirats each. The Jews and Christians got
     angry and said, 'We work more and are paid
     less.' The employer (Allah) asked them, 'Have I
     usurped some of your right?' They replied in the
     negative. He said, 'That is My Blessing, I bestow
     upon whomever I wish.' " 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 470: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah said, 'I will be an
     opponent to three types of people on the Day of
     Resurrection: 

     1. One who makes a covenant in My Name, but
     proves treacherous; 

     2. One who sells a free person and eats his price;
     and 

     3. One who employs a laborer and takes full
     work from him but does not pay him for his lab
     our.' " 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 471: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "The example of Muslims,
     Jews and Christians is like the example of a man
     who employed laborers to work for him from
     morning till night for specific wages. They
     worked till midday and then said, 'We do not
     need your money which you have fixed for us
     and let whatever we have done be annulled.' The
     man said to them, 'Don't quit the work, but
     complete the rest of it and take your full wages.'
     But they refused and went away. The man
     employed another batch after them and said to
     them, 'Complete the rest of the day and yours
     will be the wages I had fixed for the first batch.'
     So, they worked till the time of 'Asr prayer. Then
     they said, "Let what we have done be annulled
     and keep the wages you have promised us for
     yourself.' The man said to them, 'Complete the
     rest of the work, as only a little of the day
     remains,' but they refused. Thereafter he
     employed another batch to work for the rest of
     the day and they worked for the rest of the day
     till the sunset, and they received the wages of the
     two former batches. So, that was the example of
     those people (Muslims) and the example of this
     light (guidance) which they have accepted
     willingly. 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 472: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Three men from
     among those who were before you, set out
     together till they reached a cave at night and
     entered it. A big rock rolled down the mountain
     and closed the mouth of the cave. They said (to
     each other), Nothing could save you Tom this
     rock but to invoke Allah by giving referenda to
     the righteous deed which you have done (for
     Allah's sake only).' So, one of them said, 'O
     Allah! I had old parents and I never provided my
     family (wife, children etc.) with milk before them.
     One day, by chance I was delayed, and I came
     late (at night) while they had slept. I milked the
     sheep for them and took the milk to them, but I
     found them sleeping. I disliked to provide my
     family with the milk before them. I waited for
     them and the bowl of milk was in my hand and I
     kept on waiting for them to get up till the day
     dawned. Then they got up and drank the milk. O
     Allah! If I did that for Your Sake only, please
     relieve us from our critical situation caused by
     this rock.' So, the rock shifted a little but they
     could not get out." 

     The Prophet added, "The second man said, 'O
     Allah! I had a cousin who was the dearest of all
     people to me and I wanted to have sexual
     relations with her but she refused. Later she had
     a hard time in a famine year and she came to me
     and I gave her one-hundred-and-twenty Dinars
     on the condition that she would not resist my
     desire, and she agreed. When I was about to
     fulfill my desire, she said: It is illegal for you to
     outrage my chastity except by legitimate
     marriage. So, I thought it a sin to have sexual
     intercourse with her and left her though she was
     the dearest of all the people to me, and also I left
     the gold I had given her. O Allah! If I did that for
     Your Sake only, please relieve us from the
     present calamity.' So, the rock shifted a little
     more but still they could not get out from there." 

     The Prophet added, "Then the third man said, 'O
     Allah! I employed few laborers and I paid them
     their wages with the exception of one man who
     did not take his wages and went away. I invested
     his wages and I got much property thereby.
     (Then after some time) he came and said to me:
     O Allah's slave! Pay me my wages. I said to him:
     All the camels, cows, sheep and slaves you see,
     are yours. He said: O Allah's slave! Don't mock
     at me. I said: I am not mocking at you. So, he
     took all the herd and drove them away and left
     nothing. O Allah! If I did that for Your Sake
     only, please relieve us from the present suffering.'
     So, that rock shifted completely and they got out
     walking. 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 473: 

     Narrated Abu May' id Al-Ansari: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle ordered us to give in
     charity we would go to the market and work as
     porters to earn a Mudd (two hand-fulls) (of
     foodstuff) but now some of us have one-hundred
     thousand Dirhams or Diners. (The sub-narrator)
     Shaqiq said, "I think Abu Mas'ud meant himself
     by saying (some of us) . 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 474: 

     Narrated Tawus: 

     Ibn 'Abbas said, "The Prophet forbade the
     meeting of caravans (on the way) and ordained
     that no townsman is permitted to sell things on
     behalf of a bedouin." I asked Ibn 'Abbas, "What
     is the meaning of his saying, 'No townsman is
     permitted to sell things on behalf of a bedouin.' "
     He replied, "He should not work as a broker for
     him." 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 475: 

     Narrated Khabbab: 

     I was a blacksmith and did some work for
     Al-'As bin Wail. When he owed me some money
     for my work, I went to him to ask for that
     amount. He said, "I will not pay you unless you
     disbelieve in Muhammad." I said, "By Allah! I
     will never do that till you die and be resurrected."
     He said, "Will I be dead and then resurrected
     after my death?" I said, "Yes." He said, "There I
     will have property and offspring and then I will
     pay you your due." Then Allah revealed. 'Have
     you seen him who disbelieved in Our signs, and
     yet says: I will be given property and offspring?'
     (19.77) 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 476: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     Some of the companions of the Prophet went on
     a journey till they reached some of the 'Arab
     tribes (at night). They asked the latter to treat
     them as their guests but they refused. The chief of
     that tribe was then bitten by a snake (or stung by
     a scorpion) and they tried their best to cure him
     but in vain. Some of them said (to the others),
     "Nothing has benefited him, will you go to the
     people who resided here at night, it may be that
     some of them might possess something (as
     treatment)," They went to the group of the
     companions (of the Prophet ) and said, "Our
     chief has been bitten by a snake (or stung by a
     scorpion) and we have tried everything but he
     has not benefitted. Have you got anything
     (useful)?" One of them replied, "Yes, by Allah! I
     can recite a Ruqya, but as you have refused to
     accept us as your guests, I will not recite the
     Ruqya for you unless you fix for us some wages
     for it." They agrees to pay them a flock of sheep.
     One of them then went and recited
     (Suratul-Fatiha): 'All the praises are for the Lord
     of the Worlds' and puffed over the chief who
     became all right as if he was released from a
     chain, and got up and started walking, showing
     no signs of sickness. 

     They paid them what they agreed to pay. Some
     of them (i.e. the companions) then suggested to
     divide their earnings among themselves, but the
     one who performed the recitation said, "Do not
     divide them till we go to the Prophet and narrate
     the whole story to him, and wait for his order."
     So, they went to Allah's Apostle and narrated the
     story. Allah's Apostle asked, "How did you
     come to know that Surat-ul-Fatiha was recited
     as Ruqya?" Then he added, "You have done the
     right thing. Divide (what you have earned) and
     assign a share for me as well." The Prophet
     smiled thereupon. 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 477: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     When Abu Taiba cupped the Prophet and the
     Prophet ordered that he be paid one or two Sas
     of foodstuff and he interceded with his masters to
     reduce his taxes. 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 478: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     When the Prophet was cupped, he paid the man
     who cupped him his wages. 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 479: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     When the Prophet was cupped, he paid the man
     who cupped him his wages. If it had been
     undesirable he would not have paid him. 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 480: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet used to get cupped and would
     never withhold the wages of any person . 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 481: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet sent for a slave who had the
     profession of cupping, and he cupped him. The
     Prophet ordered that he be paid one or two Sas,
     or one or two Mudds of foodstuff, and appealed
     to his masters to reduce his taxes: 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 482: 

     Narrated Abu Masud Al-Ansari: 

     Allah's Apostle regarded illegal the price of a
     dog, the earnings of a prostitute, and the charges
     taken by a soothsayer. 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 483: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet prohibited
     the earnings of slave girls (through prostitution). 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 484: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet forbade taking a price for animal
     copulation. 


Volume 3, Book 36, Number 485: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     "Allah's Apostle gave the land of Khaibar to the
     Jews to work on and cultivate and take half of its
     yield. Ibn 'Umar added, "The land used to be
     rented for a certain portion (of its yield)." Nafi
     mentioned the amount of the portion but I forgot
     it. Rafi' bin Khadij said, "The Prophet forbade
     renting farms." Narrated 'Ubaid-Ullah Nafi' said:
     Ibn 'Umar said: (The contract of Khaibar
     continued) till 'Umar evacuated the Jews (from
     Khaibar). 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 37: 

Transferance of a Debt from
     One Person to Another
            (Al-Hawaala) 



Volume 3, Book 37, Number 486: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Procrastination (delay) in
     paying debts by a wealthy man is injustice. So, if
     your debt is transferred from your debtor to a
     rich debtor, you should agree." 


Volume 3, Book 37, Number 487: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Procrastination (delay) in
     paying debts by a wealthy person is injustice. So,
     if your debt is transferred from your debtor to a
     rich debtor, you should agree." 


Volume 3, Book 37, Number 488r: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     Once, while we were sitting in the company of
     Prophet, a dead man was brought. The Prophet
     was requested to lead the funeral prayer for the
     deceased. He said, "Is he in debt?" The people
     replied in the negative. He said, "Has he left any
     wealth?" They said, "No." So, he led his funeral
     prayer. Another dead man was brought and the
     people said, "O Allah's Apostle! Lead his funeral
     prayer." The Prophet said, "Is he in debt?" They
     said, "Yes." He said, "Has he left any wealth?"
     They said, ''Three Dinars." So, he led the prayer.
     Then a third dead man was brought and the
     people said (to the Prophet ), Please lead his
     funeral prayer." He said, "Has he left any
     wealth?" They said, "No." He asked, "Is he in
     debt?" They said, ("Yes! He has to pay) three
     Diners.', He (refused to pray and) said, "Then
     pray for your (dead) companion." Abu Qatada
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! Lead his funeral prayer,
     and I will pay his debt." So, he led the prayer. 


Volume 3, Book 37, Number 488h: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "An Israeli man asked another
     Israeli to lend him one thousand Dinars. The
     second man required witnesses. The former
     replied, 'Allah is sufficient as a witness.' The
     second said, 'I want a surety.' The former
     replied, 'Allah is sufficient as a surety.' The
     second said, 'You are right,' and lent him the
     money for a certain period. The debtor went
     across the sea. When he finished his job, he
     searched for a conveyance so that he might reach
     in time for the repayment of the debt, but he
     could not find any. So, he took a piece of wood
     and made a hole in it, inserted in it one thousand
     Dinars and a letter to the lender and then closed
     (i.e. sealed) the hole tightly. He took the piece of
     wood to the sea and said. 'O Allah! You know
     well that I took a loan of one thousand Dinars
     from so-and-so. He demanded a surety from me
     but I told him that Allah's Guarantee was
     sufficient and he accepted Your guarantee. He
     then asked for a witness and I told him that Allah
     was sufficient as a Witness, and he accepted
     You as a Witness. No doubt, I tried hard to find
     a conveyance so that I could pay his money but
     could not find, so I hand over this money to
     You.' Saying that, he threw the piece of wood
     into the sea till it went out far into it, and then he
     went away. Meanwhile he started searching for a
     conveyance in order to reach the creditor's
     country. 

     One day the lender came out of his house to see
     whether a ship had arrived bringing his money,
     and all of a sudden he saw the piece of wood in
     which his money had been deposited. He took it
     home to use for fire. When he sawed it, he found
     his money and the letter inside it. Shortly after
     that, the debtor came bringing one thousand
     Dinars to him and said, 'By Allah, I had been
     trying hard to get a boat so that I could bring you
     your money, but failed to get one before the one
     I have come by.' The lender asked, 'Have you
     sent something to me?' The debtor replied, 'I
     have told you I could not get a boat other than
     the one I have come by.' The lender said, 'Allah
     has delivered on your behalf the money you sent
     in the piece of wood. So, you may keep your
     one thousand Dinars and depart guided on the
     right path.' " 


Volume 3, Book 37, Number 489: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     Ibn Abbas said, "In the verse: To every one We
     have appointed ' (Muwaliya Mawaliya means
     one's) heirs (4.33).' (And regarding the verse)
     'And those with whom your right hands have
     made a pledge.' Ibn 'Abbas said, "When the
     emigrants came to the Prophet in Medina, the
     emigrant would inherit the Ansari while the
     latter's relatives would not inherit him because of
     the bond of brotherhood which the Prophet
     established between them (i.e. the emigrants and
     the Ansar). When the verse: 'And to everyone
     We have appointed heirs' (4.33) was revealed, it
     cancelled (the bond (the pledge) of brotherhood
     regarding inheritance)." Then he said, "The verse:
     To those also to whom your right hands have
     pledged, remained valid regarding co-operation
     and mutual advice, while the matter of inheritance
     was excluded and it became permissible to
     assign something in one's testament to the person
     who had the right of inheriting before. 


Volume 3, Book 37, Number 490: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf came to us and Allah's
     Apostle established a bond of brotherhood
     between him and Sad bin Rabi'a. 


Volume 3, Book 37, Number 491: 

     Narrated Asim: 

     I heard Anas bin Malik, "Have you ever heard
     that the Prophet said, 'There is no alliance in
     Islam?' " He replied, "The Prophet made alliance
     between Quarish and the Ansar in my house." 


Volume 3, Book 37, Number 492: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     A dead person was brought to the Prophet so
     that he might lead the funeral prayer for him. He
     asked, "Is he in debt?" When the people replied
     in the negative, he led the funeral prayer. Another
     dead person was brought and he asked, "Is he in
     debt?" They said, "Yes." He (refused to lead the
     prayer and) said, "Lead the prayer of your
     friend." Abu Qatada said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
     undertake to pay his debt." Allah's Apostle then
     led his funeral prayer. 


Volume 3, Book 37, Number 493: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Once the Prophet said (to me), "If the money of
     Bahrain comes, I will give you a certain amount
     of it." The Prophet had breathed his last before
     the money of Bahrain arrived. When the money
     of Bahrain reached, Abu Bakr announced,
     "Whoever was promised by the Prophet should
     come to us." I went to Abu Bakr and said, "The
     Prophet promised me so and so." Abu Bakr
     gave me a handful of coins and when I counted
     them, they were five-hundred in number. Abu
     Bakr then said, "Take twice the amount you have
     taken (besides)." 


Volume 3, Book 37, Number 494: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     (wife of the Prophet) Since I reached the age
     when I could remember things, I have seen my
     parents worshipping according to the right faith
     of Islam. Not a single day passed but Allah's
     Apostle visited us both in the morning and in the
     evening. When the Muslims were persecuted,
     Abu Bakr set out for Ethiopia as an emigrant.
     When he reached a place called
     Bark-al-Ghimad, he met Ibn Ad-Daghna, the
     chief of the Qara tribe, who asked Abu Bakr,
     "Where are you going?" Abu Bakr said, "My
     people have turned me out of the country and I
     would like to tour the world and worship my
     Lord." Ibn Ad-Daghna said, "A man like you will
     not go out, nor will he be turned out as you help
     the poor earn their living, keep good relation with
     your Kith and kin, help the disabled (or the
     dependents), provide guests with food and
     shelter, and help people during their troubles. I
     am your protector. So, go back and worship
     your Lord at your home." Ibn Ad-Daghna went
     along with Abu Bakr and took him to the chiefs
     of Quraish saying to them, "A man like Abu Bakr
     will not go out, nor will he be turned out. Do you
     turn out a man who helps the poor earn their
     living, keeps good relations with Kith and kin,
     helps the disabled, provides guests with food and
     shelter, and helps the people during their
     troubles?" 

     So, Quraish allowed Ibn Ad-Daghna's guarantee
     of protection and told Abu- Bakr that he was
     secure, and said to Ibn Ad-Daghna, "Advise
     Abu Bakr to worship his Lord in his house and
     to pray and read what he liked and not to hurt us
     and not to do these things publicly, for we fear
     that our sons and women may follow him." Ibn
     Ad-Daghna told Abu Bakr of all that, so Abu-
     Bakr continued worshipping his Lord in his house
     and did not pray or recite Qur'an aloud except in
     his house. Later on Abu Bakr had an idea of
     building a mosque in the court yard of his house.
     He fulfilled that idea and started praying and
     reciting Qur'an there publicly. The women and
     the offspring of the pagans started gathering
     around him and looking at him astonishingly. Abu
     Bakr was a softhearted person and could not
     help weeping while reciting Qur'an. This horrified
     the pagan chiefs of Quraish. They sent for Ibn
     Ad-Daghna and when he came, they said, "We
     have given Abu Bakr protection on condition that
     he will worship his Lord in his house, but he has
     transgressed that condition and has built a
     mosque in the court yard of his house and
     offered his prayer and recited Qur'an in public.
     We are afraid lest he mislead our women and
     offspring. So, go to him and tell him that if he
     wishes he can worship his Lord in his house only,
     and if not, then tell him to return your pledge of
     protection as we do not like to betray you by
     revoking your pledge, nor can we tolerate Abu
     Bakr's public declaration of Islam (his
     worshipping)." 

     'Aisha added: Ibn Ad-Daghna came to Abu
     Bakr and said, "You know the conditions on
     which I gave you protection, so you should either
     abide by those conditions or revoke my
     protection, as I do not like to hear the 'Arabs
     saying that Ibn Ad-Daghna gave the pledge of
     protection to a person and his people did not
     respect it." Abu Bakr said, "I revoke your pledge
     of protection and am satisfied with Allah's
     protection." At that time Allah's Apostle was still
     in Mecca and he said to his companions, "Your
     place of emigration has been shown to me. I
     have seen salty land, planted with date-palms
     and situated between two mountains which are
     the two ,Harras." So, when the Prophet told it,
     some of the companions migrated to Medina,
     and some of those who had migrated to Ethiopia
     returned to Medina. When Abu Bakr prepared
     for emigration, Allah's Apostle said to him,
     "Wait, for I expect to be permitted to emigrate."
     Abu Bakr asked, "May my father be sacrificed
     for your sake, do you really expect that?" Allah's
     Apostle replied in the affirmative. So, Abu Bakr
     postponed his departure in order to accompany
     Allah's Apostle and fed two camels which he
     had, with the leaves of Samor trees for four
     months. 


Volume 3, Book 37, Number 495: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Whenever a dead man in debt was brought to
     Allah's Apostle he would ask, "Has he left
     anything to repay his debt?" If he was informed
     that he had left something to repay his debts, he
     would offer his funeral prayer, otherwise he
     would tell the Muslims to offer their friend's
     funeral prayer. When Allah made the Prophet
     wealthy through conquests, he said, "I am more
     rightful than other believers to be the guardian of
     the believers, so if a Muslim dies while in debt, I
     am responsible for the repayment of his debt,
     and whoever leaves wealth (after his death) it will
     belong to his heirs. " 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 38: 

           Representation,
  Authorization, Business by
                   Proxy 



Volume 3, Book 38, Number 496: 

     Narrated 'Ali: Allah's Apostle ordered me to
     distribute the saddles and skins of the Budn
     which had slaughtered. 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 497: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin Amir: 

     that the Prophet had given him sheep to distribute
     among his companions and a male kid was left
     (after the distribution). When he informed the
     Prophet of it, he said (to him), "Offer it as a
     sacrifice on your behalf." 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 498: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf: 

     I got an agreement written between me and
     Umaiya bin Khalaf that Umaiya would look after
     my property (or family) in Mecca and I would
     look after his in Medina. When I mentioned the
     word 'Ar-Rahman' in the documents, Umaiya
     said, "I do not know 'Ar-Rahman.' Write down
     to me your name, (with which you called
     yourself) in the Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance."
     So, I wrote my name ' 'Abdu 'Amr'. On the day
     (of the battle) of Badr, when all the people went
     to sleep, I went up the hill to protect him. Bilal(1)
     saw him (i.e. Umaiya) and went to a gathering of
     Ansar and said, "(Here is) Umaiya bin Khalaf!
     Woe to me if he escapes!" So, a group of Ansar
     went out with Bilal to follow us ('Abdur-Rahman
     and Umaiya). Being afraid that they would catch
     us, I left Umaiya's son for them to keep them
     busy but the Ansar killed the son and insisted on
     following us. Umaiya was a fat man, and when
     they approached us, I told him to kneel down,
     and he knelt, and I laid myself on him to protect
     him, but the Ansar killed him by passing their
     swords underneath me, and one of them injured
     my foot with his sword. (The sub narrator said, "
     'Abdur-Rahman used to show us the trace of the
     wound on the back of his foot.") 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 499: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri and Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle employed someone as a
     governor at Khaibar. When the man came to
     Medina, he brought with him dates called Janib.
     The Prophet asked him, "Are all the dates of
     Khaibar of this kind?" The man replied, "(No),
     we exchange two Sa's of bad dates for one Sa of
     this kind of dates (i.e. Janib), or exchange three
     Sa's for two." On that, the Prophet said, "Don't
     do so, as it is a kind of usury (Riba) but sell the
     dates of inferior quality for money, and then buy
     Janib with the money". The Prophet said the
     same thing about dates sold by weight. (See
     Hadith No. 506). 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 500: 

     Narrated Ibn Ka'b bin Malik from his father: 

     We had some sheep which used to graze at
     Sala'. One of our slavegirls saw a sheep dying
     and she broke a stone and slaughtered the sheep
     with it. My father said to the people, "Don't eat it
     till I ask the Prophet about it (or till I send
     somebody to ask the Prophet)." So, he asked or
     sent somebody to ask the Prophet, and the
     Prophet permitted him to eat it. 'Ubaidullah (a
     sub-narrator) said, "I admire that girl, for though
     she was a slave-girl, she dared to slaughter the
     sheep . " 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 501: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet owed somebody a camel of a
     certain age. When he came to demand it back,
     the Prophet said (to some people), "Give him (his
     due)." When the people searched for a camel of
     that age, they found none, but found a camel one
     year older. The Prophet said, "Give (it to) him."
     On that, the man remarked, "You have given me
     my right in full. May Allah give you in full." The
     Prophet said, "The best amongst you is the one
     who pays the rights of others generously." 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 502: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man came to the Prophet demanding his debts
     and behaved rudely. The companions of the
     Prophet intended to harm him, but Allah's
     Apostle said (to them), "Leave him, for the
     creditor (i.e. owner of a right) has the right to
     speak." Allah's Apostle then said, "Give him a
     camel of the same age as that of his." The people
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! There is only a camel
     that is older than his." Allah's Apostle said, "Give
     (it to) him, for the best amongst you is he who
     pays the rights of others handsomely." 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 503: 

     Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam and Al-Miswar
     bin Makhrama: 

     When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin after
     embracing Islam, came to Allah's Apostle, he got
     up. They appealed to him to return their
     properties and their captives. Allah's Apostle
     said to them, "The most beloved statement to me
     is the true one. So, you have the option of
     restoring your properties or your captives, for I
     have delayed distributing them." The narrator
     added, Allah's Apostle c had been waiting for
     them for more than ten days on his return from
     Taif. When they realized that Allah's Apostle
     would return to them only one of two things, they
     said, "We choose our captives." So, Allah's
     Apostle got up in the gathering of the Muslims,
     praised Allah as He deserved, and said, "Then
     after! These brethren of yours have come to you
     with repentance and I see it proper to return their
     captives to them. So, whoever amongst you likes
     to do that as a favor, then he can do it, and
     whoever of you wants to stick to his share till we
     pay him from the very first booty which Allah will
     give us then he can do so." The people replied,
     "We agree to give up our shares willingly as a
     favor for Allah's Apostle." Then Allah's Apostle
     said, "We don't know who amongst you has
     agreed and who hasn't. Go back and your chiefs
     may tell us your opinion." So, all of them returned
     and their chiefs discussed the matter with them
     and then they (i.e. their chiefs) came to Allah's
     Apostle to tell him that they (i.e. the people) had
     given up their shares gladly and willingly. 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 504: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     I was accompanying the Prophet on a journey
     and was riding a slow camel that was lagging
     behind the others. The Prophet passed by me
     and asked, "Who is this?" I replied, "Jabir bin
     'Abdullah." He asked, "What is the matter, (why
     are you late)?" I replied, "I am riding a slow
     camel." He asked, "Do you have a stick?" I
     replied in the affirmative. He said, "Give it to me."
     When I gave it to him, he beat the camel and
     rebuked it. Then that camel surpassed the others
     thenceforth. The Prophet said, "Sell it to me." I
     replied, "It is (a gift) for you, O Allah's Apostle."
     He said, "Sell it to me. I have bought it for four
     Dinars (gold pieces) and you can keep on riding
     it till Medina." When we approached Medina, I
     started going (towards my house). The Prophet
     said, "Where are you going?" I Sad, "I have
     married a widow." He said, "Why have you not
     married a virgin to fondle with each other?" I
     said, "My father died and left daughters, so I
     decided to marry a widow (an experienced
     woman) (to look after them)." He said, "Well
     done." When we reached Medina, Allah's
     Apostle said, "O Bilal, pay him (the price of the
     camel) and give him extra money." Bilal gave me
     four Dinars and one Qirat extra. (A sub-narrator
     said): Jabir added, "The extra Qirat of Allah's
     Apostle never parted from me." The Qirat was
     always in Jabir bin 'Abdullah's purse. 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 505r: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I want to give up myself to you."
     A man said, "Marry her to me." The Prophet
     said, "We agree to marry her to you with what
     you know of the Qur'an by heart." 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 505t: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle deputed me to keep Sadaqat
     (al-Fitr) of Ramadan. A comer came and started
     taking handfuls of the foodstuff (of the Sadaqa)
     (stealthily). I took hold of him and said, "By
     Allah, I will take you to Allah's Apostle ." He
     said, "I am needy and have many dependents,
     and I am in great need." I released him, and in
     the morning Allah's Apostle asked me, "What did
     your prisoner do yesterday?" I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! The person complained of being needy
     and of having many dependents, so, I pitied him
     and let him go." Allah's Apostle said, "Indeed, he
     told you a lie and he will be coming again." I
     believed that he would show up again as Allah's
     Apostle had told me that he would return. So, I
     waited for him watchfully. When he (showed up
     and) started stealing handfuls of foodstuff, I
     caught hold of him again and said, "I will
     definitely take you to Allah's Apostle. He said,
     "Leave me, for I am very needy and have many
     dependents. I promise I will not come back
     again." I pitied him and let him go. 

     In the morning Allah's Apostle asked me, "What
     did your prisoner do." I replied, "O Allah's
     Apostle! He complained of his great need and of
     too many dependents, so I took pity on him and
     set him free." Allah's Apostle said, "Verily, he
     told you a lie and he will return." I waited for him
     attentively for the third time, and when he (came
     and) started stealing handfuls of the foodstuff, I
     caught hold of him and said, "I will surely take
     you to Allah's Apostle as it is the third time you
     promise not to return, yet you break your
     promise and come." He said, "(Forgive me and) I
     will teach you some words with which Allah will
     benefit you." I asked, "What are they?" He
     replied, "Whenever you go to bed, recite
     "Ayat-al-Kursi"-- 'Allahu la ilaha illa
     huwa-l-Haiy-ul Qaiyum' till you finish the whole
     verse. (If you do so), Allah will appoint a guard
     for you who will stay with you and no satan will
     come near you till morning. " So, I released him.
     In the morning, Allah's Apostle asked, "What did
     your prisoner do yesterday?" I replied, "He
     claimed that he would teach me some words by
     which Allah will benefit me, so I let him go."
     Allah's Apostle asked, "What are they?" I
     replied, "He said to me, 'Whenever you go to
     bed, recite Ayat-al-Kursi from the beginning to
     the end ---- Allahu la ilaha illa
     huwa-lHaiy-ul-Qaiyum----.' He further said to
     me, '(If you do so), Allah will appoint a guard for
     you who will stay with you, and no satan will
     come near you till morning.' (Abu Huraira or
     another sub-narrator) added that they (the
     companions) were very keen to do good deeds.
     The Prophet said, "He really spoke the truth,
     although he is an absolute liar. Do you know
     whom you were talking to, these three nights, O
     Abu Huraira?" Abu Huraira said, "No." He said,
     "It was Satan." 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 506: 

     Narrated Abu Said al-Khudri: 

     Once Bilal brought Barni (i.e. a kind of dates) to
     the Prophet and the Prophet asked him, "From
     where have you brought these?" Bilal replied, "I
     had some inferior type of dates and exchanged
     two Sas of it for one Sa of Barni dates in order
     to give it to the Prophet; to eat." Thereupon the
     Prophet said, "Beware! Beware! This is definitely
     Riba (usury)! This is definitely Riba (Usury)!
     Don't do so, but if you want to buy (a superior
     kind of dates) sell the inferior dates for money
     and then buy the superior kind of dates with that
     money." 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 507: 

     Narrated 'Amr: 

     Concerning the Waqf of 'Umar: It was not sinful
     of the trustee (of the Waqf) to eat or provide his
     friends from it, provided the trustee had no
     intention of collecting fortune (for himself). Ibn
     'Umar was the manager of the trust of 'Umar and
     he used to give presents from it to those with
     whom he used to stay at Mecca. 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 508: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid and Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "O Unais! Go to the wife of
     this (man) and if she confesses (that she has
     committed illegal sexual intercourse), then stone
     her to death." 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 509: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith: 

     When An-Nuaman or his son was brought in a
     state of drunkenness, Allah's Apostle ordered all
     those who were present in the house to beat him.
     I was one of those who beat him. We beat him
     with shoes and palm-leaf stalks. 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 510: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I twisted the garlands of the Hadis (i.e. animals
     for sacrifice) of Allah's Apostle with my own
     hands. Then Allah's Apostle put them around
     their necks with his own hands, and sent them
     with my father (to Mecca). Nothing legal was
     regarded illegal for Allah's Apostle till the animals
     were slaughtered. 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 511: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Abu Talha was the richest man in Medina
     amongst the Ansar and Beeruha' (garden) was
     the most beloved of his property, and it was
     situated opposite the mosque (of the Prophet.).
     Allah's Apostle used to enter it and drink from its
     sweet water. When the following Divine Verse
     were revealed: 'you will not attain righteousness
     till you spend in charity of the things you love'
     (3.93), Abu Talha got up in front of Allah's
     Apostle and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Allah says
     in His Book, 'You will not attain righteousness
     unless you spend (in charity) that which you
     love,' and verily, the most beloved to me of my
     property is Beeruha (garden), so I give it in
     charity and hope for its reward from Allah. O
     Allah's Apostle! Spend it wherever you like."
     Allah's Apostle appreciated that and said, "That
     is perishable wealth, that is perishable wealth. I
     have heard what you have said; I suggest you to
     distribute it among your relatives." Abu Talha
     said, "I will do so, O Allah's Apostle." So, Abu
     Talha distributed it among his relatives and
     cousins. The sub-narrator (Malik) said: The
     Prophet said: "That is a profitable wealth,"
     instead of "perishable wealth". 


Volume 3, Book 38, Number 512: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "An honest treasurer who
     gives what he is ordered to give fully, perfectly
     and willingly to the person to whom he is ordered
     to give, is regarded as one of the two charitable
     persons." 


 Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 39: 

              Agriculture 



Volume 3, Book 39, Number 513: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There is none amongst the
     Muslims who plants a tree or sows seeds, and
     then a bird, or a person or an animal eats from it,
     but is regarded as a charitable gift for him." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 514: 

     Narrated Abu Umama al-Bahili: 

     I saw some agricultural equipments and said: "I
     heard the Prophet saying: "There is no house in
     which these equipment enters except that Allah
     will cause humiliation to enter it." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 515: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever keeps a dog, one
     Qirat of the reward of his good deeds is
     deducted daily, unless the dog is used for
     guarding a farm or cattle." Abu Huraira (in
     another narration) said from the Prophet, "unless
     it is used for guarding sheep or farms, or for
     hunting." Narrated Abu Hazim from Abu Huraira:
     The Prophet said, "A dog for guarding cattle or
     for hunting." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 516: 

     Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid: 

     Abu Sufyan bin Abu Zuhair, a man from Azd
     Shanu'a and one of the companions of the
     Prophet said, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'If
     one keeps a dog which is meant for guarding
     neither a farm nor cattle, one Qirat of the reward
     of his good deeds is deducted daily." I said, "Did
     you hear this from Allah's Apostle?" He said,
     "Yes, by the Lord of this Mosque." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 517: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "While a man was riding a
     cow, it turned towards him and said, 'I have not
     been created for this purpose (i.e. carrying), I
     have been created for sloughing." The Prophet
     added, "I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar believe in the
     story." The Prophet went on, "A wolf caught a
     sheep, and when the shepherd chased it, the wolf
     said, 'Who will be its guard on the day of wild
     beasts, when there will be no shepherd for it
     except me?' "After narrating it, the Prophet said,
     "I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar too believe it." Abu
     Salama (a sub-narrator) said, "Abu Bakr and
     'Umar were not present then." (It has been
     written that a wolf also spoke to one of the
     companions of the Prophet near Medina as
     narrated in Fatah-al-Bari: 

     Narrated Unais bin 'Amr: Ahban bin Aus said, "I
     was amongst my sheep. Suddenly a wolf caught
     a sheep and I shouted at it. The wolf sat on its
     tail and addressed me, saying, 'Who will look
     after it (i.e. the sheep) when you will be busy and
     not able to look after it? Do you forbid me the
     provision which Allah has provided me?' " Ahban
     added, "I clapped my hands and said, 'By Allah,
     I have never seen anything more curious and
     wonderful than this!' On that the wolf said, 'There
     is something (more curious) and wonderful than
     this; that is, Allah's Apostle in those palm trees,
     inviting people to Allah (i.e. Islam).' "Unais bin
     'Amr further said, "Then Ahban went to Allah's
     Apostle and informed him what happened and
     embraced Islam.)" palm trees or other trees and
     share the fruits with me." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 518: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Ansar said to the Prophet "Distribute the
     date palm trees between us and our emigrant
     brothers." He replied, "No." The Ansar said (to
     the emigrants), "Look after the trees (water and
     watch them) and share the fruits with us." The
     emigrants said, "We listen and obey." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 519: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet got the date palm trees of the tribe
     of Bani-An-Nadir burnt and the trees cut down
     at a place called Al-Buwaira . Hassan bin Thabit
     said in a poetic verse: "The chiefs of Bani Lu'ai
     found it easy to watch fire spreading at
     Al-Buwaira." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 520: 

     Narrated Rafi' bin Khadij: 

     We worked on farms more than anybody else in
     Medina. We used to rent the land at the yield of
     specific delimited portion of it to be given to the
     landlord. Sometimes the vegetation of that
     portion was affected by blights etc., while the
     rest remained safe and vice versa, so the Prophet
     forbade this practice. At that time gold or silver
     were not used (for renting the land). If they
     provided the seeds, they would get so-and-so
     much. Al-Hasan said, "There is no harm if the
     land belongs to one but both spend on it and the
     yield is divided between them." Az-Zuhri had the
     same opinion. Al-Hasan said, "There is no harm
     if cotton is picked on the condition of having half
     the yield." Ibrahim, Ibn Siain, 'Ata', Al-Hakam,
     Az-Zuhri and Qatada said, "There is no harm in
     giving the yarn to the weaver to weave into cloth
     on the basis that one-third or one-fourth (or any
     other portion) of the cloth is given to the weaver
     for his labor." Ma'am said, "There is no harm in
     hiring animals for a definite (fixed) period on the
     basis that one-third or one-fourth of the products
     carried by the animals is given to the owner of
     the animals." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 521: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet concluded a contract with the
     people of Khaibar to utilize the land on the
     condition that half the products of fruits or
     vegetation would be their share. The Prophet
     used to give his wives one hundred Wasqs each,
     eighty Wasqs of dates and twenty Wasqs of
     barley. (When 'Umar became the Caliph) he
     gave the wives of the Prophet the option of either
     having the land and water as their shares, or
     carrying on the previous practice. Some of them
     chose the land and some chose the Wasqs, and
     'Aisha chose the land. 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 522: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet made a deal with the people of
     Khaibar that they would have half the fruits and
     vegetation of the land they cultivated. 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 523: 

     Narrated 'Amr: 

     I said to Tawus, "I wish you would give up
     Mukhabara (Share-cropping), for the people say
     that the Prophet forbade it." On that Tawus
     replied, "O 'Amr! I give the land to
     share-croppers and help them. No doubt; the
     most learned man, namely Ibn 'Abbas told me
     that the Prophet had not forbidden it but said, 'It
     is more beneficial for one to give his land free to
     one's brother than to charge him a fixed rental." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 524: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle gave the land of Khaibar to the
     Jew's on the condition that they work on it and
     cultivate it, and be given half of its yield. 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 525: 

     Narrated Rafi: 

     We worked on farms more than anybody else in
     Medina. We used to rent the land and say to the
     owner, "The yield of this portion is for us and the
     yield of that portion is for you (as the rent)." One
     of those portions might yield something and the
     other might not. So, the Prophet forbade us to
     do so. 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 526: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "While three men were
     walking, It started raining and they took shelter
     (refuge) in a cave in a mountain. A big rock
     rolled down from the mountain and closed the
     mouth of the cave. They said to each other,
     "Think of good deeds which you did for Allah's
     sake only, and invoke Allah by giving reference
     to those deeds so that He may remove this rock
     from you." One of them said, 'O Allah! I had old
     parents and small children and I used to graze the
     sheep for them. On my return to them in the
     evening, I used to milk (the sheep) and start
     providing my parents first of all before my
     children. One day I was delayed and came late
     at night and found my parents sleeping. I milked
     (the sheep) as usual and stood by their heads. I
     hated to wake them up and disliked to give milk
     to my children before them, although my children
     were weeping (because of hunger) at my feet till
     the day dawned. O Allah! If I did this for Your
     sake only, kindly remove the rock so that we
     could see the sky through it.' So, Allah removed
     the rock a little and they saw the sky. The
     second man said, 'O Allah! I was in love with a
     cousin of mine like the deepest love a man may
     have for a woman. I wanted to outrage her
     chastity but she refused unless I gave her one
     hundred Dinars. So, I struggled to collect that
     amount. And when I sat between her legs, she
     said, 'O Allah's slave! Be afraid of Allah and do
     not deflower me except rightfully (by marriage).'
     So, I got up. O Allah! If I did it for Your sake
     only, please remove the rock.' The rock shifted a
     little more. Then the third man said, 'O Allah! I
     employed a laborer for a Faraq of rice and when
     he finished his job and demanded his right, I
     presented it to him, but he refused to take it. So,
     I sowed the rice many time till I gathered cows
     and their shepherd (from the yield). (Then after
     some time) He came and said to me, 'Fear Allah
     (and give me my right)." I said, 'Go and take
     those cows and the shepherd.' He said, 'Be
     afraid of Allah! Don't mock at me.' I said, 'I am
     not mocking at you. Take (all that).' So, he took
     all that. O Allah! If I did that for Your sake only,
     please remove the rest of the rock.' So, Allah
     removed the rock." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 527: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Aslam from his father: 

     Umar said, "But for the future Muslim
     generations, I would have distributed the land of
     the villages I conquer among the soldiers as the
     Prophet distributed the land of Khaibar." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 528: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "He who cultivates land that
     does not belong to anybody is more rightful (to
     own it)." 'Urwa said, "Umar gave the same
     verdict in his Caliphate." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 529: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     While the Prophet was passing the night at his
     place of rest in Dhul-Hulaifa in the bottom of the
     valley (of Aqiq), he saw a dream and it was said
     to him, "You are in a blessed valley." Musa said,
     "Salim let our camels kneel at the place where
     'Abdullah used to make his camel kneel, seeking
     the place where Allah's Apostle used to take a
     rest, which is situated below the mosque which is
     in the bottom of the valley; it is midway between
     the mosque and the road." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 530: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     While the Prophet was in Al-'Aqiq he said,
     "Someone (meaning Gabriel) came to me from
     my Lord tonight (in my dream) and said, 'Offer
     the prayer in this blessed valley and say (I intend
     to perform) Umra along with Hajj (together).' " 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 531: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Umar expelled the Jews and the Christians from
     Hijaz. When Allah's Apostle had conquered
     Khaibar, he wanted to expel the Jews from it as
     its land became the property of Allah, His
     Apostle, and the Muslims. Allah's Apostle
     intended to expel the Jews but they requested
     him to let them stay there on the condition that
     they would do the labor and get half of the fruits.
     Allah's Apostle told them, "We will let you stay
     on thus condition, as long as we wish." So, they
     (i.e. Jews) kept on living there until 'Umar forced
     them to go towards Taima' and Ariha'. 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 532: 

     Narrated Rafi bin Khadij: 

     My uncle Zuhair said, "Allah's Apostle forbade
     us to do a thing which was a source of help to
     us." I said, "Whatever Allah's Apostle said was
     right." He said, "Allah's Apostle sent for me and
     asked, 'What are you doing with your farms?' I
     replied, 'We give our farms on rent on the basis
     that we get the yield produced at the banks of
     the water streams (rivers) for the rent, or rent it
     for some Wasqs of barley and dates.' Allah's
     Apostle said, 'Do not do so, but cultivate (the
     land) yourselves or let it be cultivated by others
     gratis, or keep it uncultivated.' I said, 'We hear
     and obey.' 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 533: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The people used to rent their land for cultivation
     for one-third, one-fourth or half its yield. The
     Prophet said, "Whoever has land should cultivate
     it himself or give it to his (Muslim) brother gratis;
     otherwise keep it uncultivated." 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said,
     "Whoever has land should cultivate it himself or
     give it to his (Muslim) brother gratis; otherwise
     he should keep it uncultivated." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 534: 

     Narrated 'Amr: 

     When I mentioned it (i.e. the narration of Rafi
     'bin Khadij: no. 532) to Tawus, he said, "It is
     permissible to rent the land for cultivation, for Ibn
     'Abbas said, 'The Prophet did not forbid that, but
     said: One had better give the land to one's
     brother gratis rather than charge a certain amount
     for it.' " 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 535: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar used to rent his farms in the time of
     Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman, and in the early days
     of Muawiya. Then he was told the narration of
     Rafi 'bin Khadij that the Prophet had forbidden
     the renting of farms. Ibn 'Umar went to Rafi' and
     I accompanied him. He asked Rafi who replied
     that the Prophet had forbidden the renting of
     farms. Ibn 'Umar said, "You know that we used
     to rent our farms in the life-time of Allah's
     Apostle for the yield of the banks of the water
     streams (rivers) and for certain amount of figs. 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 536: 

     Narrated Salim: 

     Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "I knew that the land
     was rented for cultivation in the life-time of
     Allah's Apostle ." Later on Ibn 'Umar was afraid
     that the Prophet had forbidden it, and he had no
     knowledge of it, so he gave up renting his land. 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 537: 

     Narrated Hanzla bin Qais: 

     Rafi bin Khadij said, "My two uncles told me that
     they (i.e. the companions of the Prophet) used to
     rent the land in the life-time of the Prophet for the
     yield on the banks of water streams (rivers) or
     for a portion of the yield stipulated by the owner
     of the land. The Prophet forbade it." I said to
     Rafi, "What about renting the land for Dinars and
     Dirhams?" He replied, "There is no harm in
     renting for Dinars-Dirhams. Al-Laith said, "If
     those who have discernment for distinguishing
     what is legal from what is illegal looked into what
     has been forbidden concerning this matter they
     would not permit it, for it is surrounded with
     dangers." 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 538: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Once the Prophet was narrating (a story), while a
     bedouin was sitting with him. "One of the
     inhabitants of Paradise will ask Allah to allow him
     to cultivate the land. Allah will ask him, 'Are you
     not living in the pleasures you like?' He will say,
     'Yes, but I like to cultivate the land.' " The
     Prophet added, "When the man (will be
     permitted he) will sow the seeds and the plants
     will grow up and get ripe, ready for reaping and
     so on till it will be as huge as mountains within a
     wink. Allah will then say to him, 'O son of Adam!
     Take here you are, gather (the yield); nothing
     satisfies you.' " On that, the bedouin said, "The
     man must be either from Quraish (i.e. an
     emigrant) or an Ansari, for they are farmers,
     whereas we are not farmers." The Prophet
     smiled (at this). 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 539: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     We used to be very happy on Friday as an old
     lady used to cut some roots of the Silq, which we
     used to plant on the banks of our small water
     streams, and cook them in a pot of her's, adding
     to them, some grains of barley. (Ya'qub, the
     sub-narrator said, "I think the narrator mentioned
     that the food did not contain fat or melted fat
     (taken from meat).") When we offered the Friday
     prayer we would go to her and she would serve
     us with the dish. So, we used to be happy on
     Fridays because of that. We used not to take our
     meals or the midday nap except after the Jumua
     prayer (i.e. Friday prayer) . 


Volume 3, Book 39, Number 540: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The people say that Abu Huraira narrates too
     many narrations. In fact Allah knows whether I
     say the truth or not. They also ask, "Why do the
     emigrants and the Ansar not narrate as he does?"
     In fact, my emigrant brethren were busy trading
     in the markets, and my Ansar brethren were busy
     with their properties. I was a poor man keeping
     the company of Allah's Apostle and was satisfied
     with what filled my stomach. So, I used to be
     present while they (i.e. the emigrants and the
     Ansar) were absent, and I used to remember
     while they forgot (the Hadith). One day the
     Prophet said, "Whoever spreads his sheet till I
     finish this statement of mine and then gathers it on
     his chest, will never forget anything of my
     statement." So, I spread my covering sheet which
     was the only garment I had, till the Prophet
     finished his statement and then I gathered it over
     my chest. By Him Who had sent him (i.e. Allah's
     Apostle) with the truth, since then I did not forget
     even a single word of that statement of his, until
     this day of mine. By Allah, but for two verses in
     Allah's Book, I would never have related any
     narration (from the Prophet). (These two verses
     are): "Verily! Those who conceal the clear signs
     and the guidance which we have sent down
     .....(up to) the Merciful.' (2.159-160) 


 Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 40: 

      Distribution of Water 



Volume 3, Book 40, Number 541: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     A tumbler (full of milk or water) was brought to
     the Prophet who drank from it, while on his right
     side there was sitting a boy who was the
     youngest of those who were present and on his
     left side there were old men. The Prophet asked,
     "O boy, will you allow me to give it (i.e. the rest
     of the drink) to the old men?" The boy said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I will not give preference to
     anyone over me to drink the rest of it from which
     you have drunk." So, the Prophet gave it to him. 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 542: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: 

     Anas bin Malik said, that once a domestic sheep
     was milked for Allah's Apostle while he was in
     the house of Anas bin Malik. The milk was
     mixed with water drawn from the well in Anas's
     house. A tumbler of it was presented to Allah's
     Apostle who drank from it. Then Abu Bakr was
     sitting on his left side and a bedouin on his right
     side. When the Prophet removed the tumbler
     from his mouth, 'Umar was afraid that the
     Prophet might give it to the bedouin, so he said.
     "O Allah's Apostle! Give it to Abu Bakr who is
     sitting by your side." But the Prophet gave it to
     the bedouin, who was to his right and said, "You
     should start with the one on your right side." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 543: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Do not withhold the
     superfluous water, for that will prevent people
     from grazing their cattle." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 544: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     that Allah's Apostle said, "Do not withhold the
     superfluous water in order to withhold the
     superfluous grass." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 545: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "No bloodmoney will be
     charged if somebody dies in a mine or in a well
     or is killed by an animal; and if somebody finds a
     treasure in his land he has to give one-fifth of it to
     the Government." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 546: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud): 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever takes a false oath to
     deprive somebody of his property will meet Allah
     while He will be angry with him." Allah revealed:
     'Verily those who purchase a little gain at the cost
     of Allah's covenant, and their oaths.' ........(3.77) 

     Al-Ash'ath came (to the place where 'Abdullah
     was narrating) and said, "What has Abu
     'Abdur-Rahman (i.e. Abdullah) been telling you?
     This verse was revealed concerning me. I had a
     well in the land of a cousin of mine. The Prophet
     asked me to bring witnesses (to confirm my
     claim). I said, 'I don't have witnesses.' He said,
     'Let the defendant take an oath then.' I said, 'O
     Allah's Apostle! He will take a (false) oath
     immediately.' Then the Prophet mentioned the
     above narration and Allah revealed the verse to
     confirm what he had said." (See Hadith No. 692)


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 547: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There are three persons
     whom Allah will not look at on the Day of
     Resurrection, nor will he purify them and theirs
     shall be a severe punishment. They are: 

     1. A man possessed superfluous water, on a way
     and he withheld it from travelers. 

     2. A man who gave a pledge of allegiance to a
     ruler and he gave it only for worldly benefits. If
     the ruler gives him something he gets satisfied,
     and if the ruler withholds something from him, he
     gets dissatisfied. 

     3. And man displayed his goods for sale after the
     'Asr prayer and he said, 'By Allah, except Whom
     None has the right to be worshipped, I have
     been given so much for my goods,' and
     somebody believes him (and buys them)." 

     The Prophet then recited: "Verily! Those who
     purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's
     Covenant and their oaths." (3.77) 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 548: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair: 

     An Ansari man quarrelled with Az-Zubair in the
     presence of the Prophet about the Harra Canals
     which were used for irrigating the date-palms.
     The Ansari man said to Az-Zubair, "Let the
     water pass' but Az-Zubair refused to do so. So,
     the case was brought before the Prophet who
     said to Az-Zubair, "O Zubair! Irrigate (your land)
     and then let the water pass to your neighbor." On
     that the Ansari got angry and said to the Prophet,
     "Is it because he (i.e. Zubair) is your aunt's son?"
     On that the color of the face of Allah's Apostle
     changed (because of anger) and he said, "O
     Zubair! Irrigate (your land) and then withhold the
     water till it reaches the walls between the pits
     round the trees." Zubair said, "By Allah, I think
     that the following verse was revealed on this
     occasion": "But no, by your Lord They can have
     No faith Until they make you judge In all disputes
     between them." (4.65) 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 549: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     When a man from the Ansar quarrelled with
     AzZubair, the Prophet said, "O Zubair! Irrigate
     (your land) first and then let the water flow (to
     the land of the others)." "On that the Ansari said,
     (to the Prophet), "It is because he is your aunt's
     son." On that the Prophet said, "O Zubair!
     Irrigate till the water reaches the walls between
     the pits around the trees and then stop (i.e. let the
     water go to the other's land)." I think the
     following verse was revealed concerning this
     event: "But no, by your Lord They can have No
     faith Until they make you judge In all disputes
     between them." (4.65) 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 550: 

     Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 

     An-Ansari man quarrelled with Az-Zubair about
     a canal in the Harra which was used for irrigating
     date-palms. Allah's Apostle, ordering Zubair to
     be moderate, said, "O Zubair! Irrigate (your
     land) first and then leave the water for your
     neighbor." The Ansari said, "Is it because he is
     your aunt's son?" On that the color of the face of
     Allah's Apostle changed and he said, "O Zubair!
     Irrigate (your land) and withhold the water till it
     reaches the walls that are between the pits
     around the trees." So, Allah's Apostle gave
     Zubair his full right. Zubair said, "By Allah, the
     following verse was revealed in that connection":
     "But no, by your Lord They can have No faith
     Until they make you judge In all disputes
     between them." (4.65) 

     (The sub-narrator,) Ibn Shihab said to Juraij
     (another sub-narrator), "The Ansar and the other
     people interpreted the saying of the Prophet,
     'Irrigate (your land) and with-hold the water till it
     reaches the walls between the pits around the
     trees,' as meaning up to the ankles." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 551: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "While a man was walking
     he felt thirsty and went down a well and drank
     water from it. On coming out of it, he saw a dog
     panting and eating mud because of excessive
     thirst. The man said, 'This (dog) is suffering from
     the same problem as that of mine. So he (went
     down the well), filled his shoe with water, caught
     hold of it with his teeth and climbed up and
     watered the dog. Allah thanked him for his
     (good) deed and forgave him." The people
     asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Is there a reward for
     us in serving (the) animals?" He replied, "Yes,
     there is a reward for serving any animate." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 552: 

     Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr: 

     The Prophet prayed the eclipse prayer, and then
     said, "Hell was displayed so close that I said, 'O
     my Lord ! Am I going to be one of its
     inhabitants?"' Suddenly he saw a woman. I think
     he said, who was being scratched by a cat. He
     said, "What is wrong with her?" He was told,
     "She had imprisoned it (i.e. the cat) till it died of
     hunger." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 553: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A woman was tortured
     and was put in Hell because of a cat which she
     had kept locked till it died of hunger." Allah's
     Apostle further said, (Allah knows better) Allah
     said (to the woman), 'You neither fed it nor
     watered when you locked it up, nor did you set it
     free to eat the insects of the earth." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 554: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     Once a tumbler (full of milk or water) was
     brought to Allah's Apostle who drank from it,
     while on his right side there was sitting a boy who
     was the youngest of those who were present,
     and on his left side there were old men. The
     Prophet asked, "O boy ! Do you allow me to
     give (the drink) to the elder people (first)?" The
     boy said, "I will not prefer anybody to have my
     share from you, O Allah's Apostle!" So, he gave
     it to the boy. 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 555: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "By Him in Whose Hands my
     soul is, I will drive some people out from my
     (sacred) Fount on the Day of Resurrection as
     strange camels are expelled from a private
     trough." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 556: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "May Allah be merciful to the
     mother of Ishmael! If she had left the water of
     Zam-Zam (fountain) as it was, (without
     constructing a basin for keeping the water), (or
     said, "If she had not taken handfuls of its water"),
     it would have been a flowing stream. Jurhum (an
     Arab tribe) came and asked her, 'May we settle
     at your dwelling?' She said, 'Yes, but you have
     no right to possess the water.' They agreed." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 557: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "There are three types of
     people whom Allah will neither talk to, nor look
     at, on the Day of Resurrection. (They are): 

     1. A man who takes an oath falsely that he has
     been offered for his goods so much more than
     what he is given, 

     2. a man who takes a false oath after the 'Asr
     prayer in order to grab a Muslim's property, and 

     3. a man who with-holds his superfluous water.
     Allah will say to him, "Today I will with-hold My
     Grace from you as you with-held the superfluity
     of what you had not created." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 558: 

     Narrated As-Sab bin Jaththama: 

     Allah's Apostle said, No Hima except for Allah
     and His Apostle. We have been told that Allah's
     Apostle made a place called An-Naqi' as Hima,
     and 'Umar made Ash-Sharaf and Ar-Rabadha
     Hima (for grazing the animals of Zakat). 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 559: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Keeping horses may be a
     source of reward to some (man), a shelter to
     another (i.e. means of earning one's living), or a
     burden to a third. He to whom the horse will be a
     source of reward is the one who keeps it in
     Allah's Cause (prepare it for holy battles) and
     ties it by a long rope in a pasture (or a garden).
     He will get a reward equal to what its long rope
     allows it to eat in the pasture or the garden, and if
     that horse breaks its rope and crosses one or
     two hills, then all its foot-steps and its dung will
     be counted as good deeds for its owner; and if it
     passes by a river and drinks from it, then that will
     also be regarded as a good deed for its owner
     even if he has had no intention of watering it then.
     Horses are a shelter from poverty to the second
     person who keeps horses for earning his living so
     as not to ask others, and at the same time he
     gives Allah's right (i.e. Rakat) (from the wealth he
     earns through using them in trading etc.,) and
     does not overburden them. He who keeps
     horses just out of pride and for showing off and
     as a means of harming the Muslims, his horses
     will be a source of sins to him." When Allah's
     Apostle was asked about donkeys, he replied,
     "Nothing particular was revealed to me regarding


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 560: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid: 

     A man came to Allah's Apostle and asked about
     Al-Luqata (a fallen thing). The Prophet said,
     "Recognize its container and its tying material and
     then make a public announcement about it for
     one year and if its owner shows up, give it to
     him; otherwise use it as you like." The man said,
     "What about a lost sheep?" The Prophet said, "It
     is for you, your brother or the wolf." The man
     said "What about a lost camel?" The Prophet
     said, "Why should you take it as it has got its
     water-container (its stomach) and its hooves and
     it can reach the places of water and can eat the
     trees till its owner finds it?" 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 561: 

     Narrated Az-Zubair bin Al 'Awwam: 

     The Prophet said, "No doubt, one had better
     take a rope (and cut) and tie a bundle of wood
     and sell it whereby Allah will keep his face away
     (from Hell-fire) rather than ask others who may
     give him or not." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 562: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "No doubt, you had better
     gather a bundle of wood and carry it on your
     back (and earn your living thereby) rather than
     ask somebody who may give you or not." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 563: 

     Narrated Husain bin Ali: 

     Ali bin Abi Talib said: "I got a she-camel as my
     share of the war booty on the day (of the battle)
     of Badr, and Allah's Apostle gave me another
     she-camel. I let both of them kneel at the door of
     one of the Ansar, intending to carry Idhkhir on
     them to sell it and use its price for my wedding
     banquet on marrying Fatima. A goldsmith from
     Bam Qainqa' was with me. Hamza bin
     'Abdul-Muttalib was in that house drinking wine
     and a lady singer was reciting: "O Hamza! (Kill)
     the (two) fat old she camels (and serve them to
     your guests)." 

     So Hamza took his sword and went towards the
     two she-camels and cut off their humps and
     opened their flanks and took a part of their
     livers." (I said to Ibn Shihab, "Did he take part of
     the humps?" He replied, "He cut off their humps
     and carried them away.") 'Ali further said, "When
     I saw that dreadful sight, I went to the Prophet
     and told him the news. The Prophet came out in
     the company of Zaid bin Haritha who was with
     him then, and I too went with them. He went to
     Hamza and spoke harshly to him. Hamza looked
     up and said, 'Aren't you only the slaves of my
     forefathers?' The Prophet retreated and went
     out. This incident happened before the
     prohibition of drinking." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 564: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet decided to grant a portion of (the
     uncultivated land of) Bahrain to the Ansar. The
     Ansar said, "(We will not accept it) till you give a
     similar portion to our emigrant brothers (from
     Quraish)." He said, "(O Ansar!) You will soon
     see people giving preference to others, so remain
     patient till you meet me (on the Day of
     Resurrection). 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 565: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "One
     of the rights of a she camel is that it should be
     milked at a place of water." 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 566: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Thabit: 

     The Prophet permitted selling the dates of the
     'Araya for ready dates by estimating the amount
     of the former (as they are still on the trees). 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 567: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet forbade the sales called
     Al-Mukhabara, Al-Muhaqala and Al-Muzabana
     and the selling of fruits till they are free from
     blights. He forbade the selling of the fruits except
     for money, except the 'Araya. 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 568: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet allowed the sale of the dates of the
     'Araya for ready dates by estimating the former
     which should be estimated as less than five
     Awsuq or five Awsuq. (Dawud, the sub-narrator
     is not sure as to the right amount.) 


Volume 3, Book 40, Number 569: 

     Narrated Rafi 'bin Khadij and Sahl bin Al
     Hathma: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the sale of Muzabana,
     i.e. selling of fruits for fruits, except in the case of
     'Araya; he allowed the owners of 'Araya such
     kind of sale. 


 Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 41: 

  Loans, Payment of Loans,
      Freezing of Property,
              Bankruptcy 



Volume 3, Book 41, Number 570: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     While I was in the company of the Prophet in
     one of his Ghazawat, he asked, "What is wrong
     with your camel? Will you sell it?" I replied in the
     affirmative and sold it to him. When he reached
     Medina, I took the camel to him in the morning
     and he paid me its price. 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 571: 

     Narrated Al-Amash: 

     When we were with Ibrahim, we talked about
     mortgaging in deals of Salam. Ibrahim narrated
     from Aswad that 'Aisha had said, "The Prophet
     bought some foodstuff on credit from a Jew and
     mortgaged an iron armor to him." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 572: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever takes the money of
     the people with the intention of repaying it, Allah
     will repay it on his behalf, and whoever takes it in
     order to spoil it, then Allah will spoil him." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 573: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     Once, while I was in the company of the
     Prophet, he saw the mountain of Uhud and said,
     "I would not like to have this mountain turned
     into gold for me unless nothing of it, not even a
     single Dinar remains of it with me for more than
     three days (i.e. I will spend all of it in Allah's
     Cause), except that Dinar which I will keep for
     repaying debts." Then he said, "Those who are
     rich in this world would have little reward in the
     Hereafter except those who spend their money
     here and there (in Allah's Cause), and they are
     few in number." Then he ordered me to stay at
     my place and went not far away. I heard a voice
     and intended to go to him but I remembered his
     order, "Stay at your place till I return." On his
     return I said, "O Allah's Apostle! (What was)
     that noise which I heard?" He said, "Did you hear
     anything?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Gabriel came
     and said to me, 'Whoever amongst your
     followers dies, worshipping none along with
     Allah, will enter Paradise.' " I said, "Even if he
     did such-and-such things (i.e. even if he stole or
     committed illegal sexual intercourse)" He said,
     "Yes." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 574: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If I had gold equal to the
     mountain of Uhud, it would not please me that it
     should remain with me for more than three days,
     except an amount which I would keep for
     repaying debts." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 575: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man demanded his debts from Allah's Apostle
     in such a rude manner that the companions of the
     Prophet intended to harm him, but the Prophet
     said, "Leave him, no doubt, for he (the creditor)
     has the right to demand it (harshly). Buy a camel
     and give it to him." They said, "The camel that is
     available is older than the camel he demands.
     "The Prophet said, "Buy it and give it to him, for
     the best among you are those who repay their
     debts handsomely. " 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 576: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Once a man died
     and was asked, 'What did you use to say (or do)
     (in your life time)?' He replied, 'I was a
     business-man and used to give time to the rich to
     repay his debt and (used to) deduct part of the
     debt of the poor.' So he was forgiven (his sins.)"
     Abu Masud said, "I heard the same (Hadith)
     from the Prophet." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 577: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man came to the Prophet and demanded a
     camel (the Prophet owed him). Allah's Apostle
     told his companions to give him (a camel). They
     said, "We do not find except an older camel
     (than what he demands). (The Prophet ordered
     them to give him that camel). The man said, "You
     have paid me in full and may Allah also pay you
     in full." Allah's Apostle said, "Give him, for the
     best amongst the people is he who repays his
     debts in the most handsome manner." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 578: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet owed a camel of a certain age to a
     man who came to demand it back. The Prophet
     ordered his companions to give him. They
     looked for a camel of the same age but found
     nothing but a camel one year older. The Prophet
     told them to give it to him. The man said, "You
     have paid me in full, and may Allah pay you in
     full." The Prophet said, "The best amongst you is
     he who pays his debts in the most handsome
     manner." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 579: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     I went to the Prophet while he was in the
     Mosque. (Mis'ar thinks, that Jabir went in the
     forenoon.) After the Prophet told me to pray two
     Rakat, he repayed me the debt he owed me and
     gave me an extra amount. 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 580: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     My father was martyred on the day (of the
     battle) of Uhud, and he was in debt. His
     creditors demanded their rights persistently. I
     went to the Prophet (and informed him about it).
     He told them to take the fruits of my garden and
     exempt my father from the debts but they refused
     to do so. So, the Prophet did not give them my
     garden and told me that he would come to me
     the next morning. He came to us early in the
     morning and wandered among the datepalms and
     invoked Allah to bless their fruits. I then plucked
     the dates and paid the creditors, and there
     remained some of the dates for us. 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 581: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     When my father died he owed a Jew thirty
     Awsuq (of dates). I requested him to give me
     respite for repaying but he refused. I requested
     Allah's Apostle to intercede with the Jew. Allah's
     Apostle went to the Jew and asked him to
     accept the fruits of my trees in place of the debt
     but the Jew refused. Allah's Apostle entered the
     garden of the date-palms, wandering among the
     trees and ordered me (saying), "Pluck (the fruits)
     and give him his due." So, I plucked the fruits for
     him after the departure of Allah's Apostle and
     gave his thirty Awsuq, and still had seventeen
     Awsuq extra for myself. Jabir said: I went to
     Allah's Apostle to inform of what had happened,
     but found him praying the 'Asr prayer. After the
     prayer I told him about the extra fruits which
     remained. Allah's Apostle told me to inform
     (Umar) Ibn Al-Khatab about it. When I went to
     'Umar and told him about it, 'Umar said, "When
     Allah's Apostle walked in your garden, I was
     sure that Allah would definitely bless it." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 582: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to invoke Allah in the
     prayer saying, "O Allah, I seek refuge with you
     from all sins, and from being in debt." Someone
     said, O Allah's Apostle! (I see you) very often
     you seek refuge with Allah from being in debt.
     He replied, "If a person is in debt, he tells lies
     when he speaks, and breaks his promises when
     he promises." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 583: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "If someone leaves some
     property, it will be for the inheritors, and if he
     leaves some weak offspring, it will be for us to
     support them." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 584: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "I am closer to the believers
     than their selves in this world and in the
     Hereafter, and if you like, you can read Allah's
     Statement: "The Prophet is closer to the believers
     than their own selves." (33.6) So, if a true
     believer dies and leaves behind some property, it
     will be for his inheritors (from the father's side),
     and if he leaves behind some debt to be paid or
     needy offspring, then they should come to me as
     I am the guardian of the deceased." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 585: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Procrastination (delay) in
     repaying debts by a wealthy person is injustice." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 586: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man came to the Prophet and demanded his
     debts and used harsh words. The companions of
     the Prophet wanted to harm him, but the Prophet
     said, "Leave him, as the creditor (owner of the
     right) has the right to speak." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 587: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If a man finds his very
     things with a bankrupt, he has more right to take
     them back than anyone else." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 588: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     A man pledged that his slave would be
     manumitted after his death. The Prophet asked,
     "Who will buy the slave from me?" No'aim bin
     'Abdullah bought the slave and the Prophet took
     its price and gave it to the owner. 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 589: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     When 'Abdullah (my father) died, he left behind
     children and debts. I asked the lenders to put
     down some of his debt, but they refused, so I
     went to the Prophet to intercede with them, yet
     they refused. The Prophet said (to me), "Classify
     your dates into their different kinds: 'Adhq bin
     Zaid, Lean and 'Ajwa, each kind alone and call
     all the creditors and wait till I come to you." I did
     so and the Prophet came and sat beside the
     dates and started measuring to each his due till he
     paid them fully, and the amount of dates
     remained as it was before, as if he had not
     touched them. 

     (On another occasion) I took part in one of
     Ghazawat among with the Prophet and I was
     riding one of our camels. The camel got tired and
     was lagging behind the others. The Prophet hit it
     on its back. He said, "Sell it to me, and you have
     the right to ride it till Medina.'' When we
     approached Medina, I took the permission from
     the Prophet to go to my house, saying, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I have newly married." The Prophet
     asked, "Have you married a virgin or a matron (a
     widow or divorcee)?" I said, "I have married a
     matron, as 'Abdullah (my father) died and left
     behind daughters small in their ages, so I married
     a matron who may teach them and bring them up
     with good manners." The Prophet then said (to
     me), "Go to your family." When I went there and
     told my maternal uncle about the selling of the
     camel, he admonished me for it. On that I told
     him about its slowness and exhaustion and about
     what the Prophet had done to the camel and his
     hitting it. When the Prophet arrived, I went to
     him with the camel in the morning and he gave
     me its price, the camel itself, and my share from
     the war booty as he gave the other people. 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 590: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     A man came to the Prophet and said, "I am often
     betrayed in bargaining." The Prophet advised
     him, "When you buy something, say (to the
     seller), 'No deception." The man used to say so
     afterwards. 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 591: 

     Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah has forbidden for you,
     (1) to be undutiful to your mothers, (2) to bury
     your daughters alive, (3) to not to pay the rights
     of the others (e.g. charity, etc.) and (4) to beg of
     men (begging). And Allah has hated for you (1)
     vain, useless talk, or that you talk too much
     about others, (2) to ask too many questions, (in
     disputed religious matters) and (3) to waste the
     wealth (by extravagance). 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 592: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Everyone of you
     is a guardian, and responsible for what is in his
     custody. The ruler is a guardian of his subjects
     and responsible for them; a husband is a guardian
     of his family and is responsible for it; a lady is a
     guardian of her husband's house and is
     responsible for it, and a servant is a guardian of
     his master's property and is responsible for it." I
     heard that from Allah's Apostle and I think that
     the Prophet also said, "A man is a guardian of is
     father's property and is responsible for it, so all
     of you are guardians and responsible for your
     wards and things under your care." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 593: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     I heard a man reciting a verse (of the Holy
     Qur'an) but I had heard the Prophet reciting it
     differently. So, I caught hold of the man by the
     hand and took him to Allah's Apostle who said,
     "Both of you are right." Shu'ba, the sub-narrator
     said, "I think he said to them, "Don't differ, for
     the nations before you differed and perished
     (because of their differences). " 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 594: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Two persons, a Muslim and a Jew, quarrelled.
     The Muslim said, "By Him Who gave
     Muhammad superiority over all the people! The
     Jew said, "By Him Who gave Moses superiority
     over all the people!" At that the Muslim raised his
     hand and slapped the Jew on the face. The Jew
     went to the Prophet and informed him of what
     had happened between him and the Muslim. The
     Prophet sent for the Muslim and asked him about
     it. The Muslim informed him of the event. The
     Prophet said, "Do not give me superiority over
     Moses, for on the Day of Resurrection all the
     people will fall unconscious and I will be one of
     them, but I will. be the first to gain
     consciousness, and will see Moses standing and
     holding the side of the Throne (of Allah). I will
     not know whether (Moses) has also fallen
     unconscious and got up before me, or Allah has
     exempted him from that stroke." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 595: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     While Allah's Apostle was sitting, a Jew came
     and said, "O Abul Qasim! One of your
     companions has slapped me on my face." The
     Prophet asked who that was. He replied that he
     was one of the Ansar. The Prophet sent for him,
     and on his arrival, he asked him whether he had
     beaten the Jew. He (replied in the affirmative
     and) said, "I heard him taking an oath in the
     market saying, 'By Him Who gave Moses
     superiority over all the human beings.' I said, 'O
     wicked man! (Has Allah given Moses
     superiority) even over Muhammad I became
     furious 

     and slapped him over his face." The Prophet
     said, "Do not give a prophet superiority over
     another, for on the Day of Resurrection all the
     people will fall unconscious and I will be the first
     to emerge from the earth, and will see Moses
     standing and holding one of the legs of the
     Throne. I will not know whether Moses has
     fallen unconscious or the first unconsciousness
     was sufficient for him." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 596: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     A Jew crushed the head of a girl between two
     stones. The girl was asked who had crushed her
     head, and some names were mentioned before
     her, and when the name of the Jew was
     mentioned, she nodded agreeing. The Jew was
     captured and when he confessed, the Prophet
     ordered that his head be crushed between two
     stones. 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 597: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     A man was often cheated in buying. The Prophet
     said to him, "When you buy something, say (to
     the seller), No cheating." The man used to say so
     thenceforward . 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 598: 

     Narrated Jabir: A man manumitted a slave and
     he had no other property than that, so the
     Prophet cancelled the manumission (and sold the
     slave for him). No'aim bin Al-Nahham bought
     the slave from him. 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 599: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever takes a false oath
     so as to take the property of a Muslim (illegally)
     will meet Allah while He will be angry with him."
     Al-Ash'ath said: By Allah, that saying concerned
     me. I had common land with a Jew, and the Jew
     later on denied my ownership, so I took him to
     the Prophet who asked me whether I had a
     proof of my ownership. When I replied in the
     negative, the Prophet asked the Jew to take an
     oath. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! He will take an
     oath and deprive me of my property." So, Allah
     revealed the following verse: "Verily! Those who
     purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's
     covenant and their oaths." (3.77) 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 600: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ka'b bin Malik: 

     Ka'b demanded his debt back from Ibn Abi
     Hadrad in the Mosque and their voices grew
     louder till Allah's Apostle heard them while he
     was in his house. He came out to them raising the
     curtain of his room and addressed Ka'b, "O
     Ka'b!" Ka'b replied, "Labaik, O Allah's
     Apostle." (He said to him), "Reduce your debt to
     one half," gesturing with his hand. Kab said, "I
     have done so, O Allah's Apostle!" On that the
     Prophet said to Ibn Abi Hadrad, "Get up and
     repay the debt, to him." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 601: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     I heard Hisham bin Hakim bin Hizam reciting
     Surat-al-Furqan in a way different to that of
     mine. Allah's Apostle had taught it to me (in a
     different way). So, I was about to quarrel with
     him (during the prayer) but I waited till he
     finished, then I tied his garment round his neck
     and seized him by it and brought him to Allah's
     Apostle and said, "I have heard him reciting
     Surat-al-Furqan in a way different to the way
     you taught it to me." The Prophet ordered me to
     release him and asked Hisham to recite it. When
     he recited it, Allah s Apostle said, "It was
     revealed in this way." He then asked me to recite
     it. When I recited it, he said, "It was revealed in
     this way. The Qur'an has been revealed in seven
     different ways, so recite it in the way that is
     easier for you." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 602: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "No doubt, I intended to order
     somebody to pronounce the Iqama of the
     (compulsory congregational) prayer and then I
     would go to the houses of those who do not
     attend the prayer and burn their houses over
     them." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 603: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Abu bin Zam'a and Sad bin Abi Waqqas carried
     the case of their claim of the (ownership) of the
     son of a slave-qirl of Zam'a before the Prophet.
     Sad said, "O Allah's Apostle! My brother,
     before his death, told me that when I would
     return (to Mecca), I should search for the son of
     the slave-girl of Zam'a and take him into my
     custody as he was his son." 'Abu bin Zam'a said,
     'the is my brother and the son of the slave-girl of
     my father, and was born or my father's bed." The
     Prophet noticed a resemblance between Utba
     and the boy but he said, "O 'Abu bin Zam'a! You
     will get this boy, as the son goes to the owner of
     the bed. You, Sauda, screen yourself from the
     boy." 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 604: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle sent horsemen to Najd and they
     arrested and brought a man called Thumama bin
     Uthal, the chief of Yamama, and they fastened
     him to one of the pillars of the Mosque. When
     Allah's Apostle came up to him; he asked, "What
     have you to say, O Thumama?" He replied, "I
     have good news, O Muhammad!" Abu Huraira
     narrated the whole narration which ended with
     the order of the Prophet "Release him!" 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 605: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet sent some horsemen to Najd and
     they arrested and brought a man called Thumama
     bin Uthal from the tribe of Bani Hanifa, and they
     fastened him to one of the pillars of the Mosque. 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 606: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ka'b bin Malik Al-Ansari
     from Ka'b bin Malik: 

     That 'Abdullah bin Abi Hadrad Al-Aslami owed
     him some debt. Ka'b met him and caught hold of
     him and they started talking and their voices grew
     loudest. The Prophet passed by them and
     addressed Ka'b, pointing out to him to reduce
     the debt to one half. So, Ka'b got one half of the
     debt and exempted the debtor from the other
     half. 


Volume 3, Book 41, Number 607: 

     Narrated Khabbab: 

     I was a blacksmith In the Pre-lslamic period of
     ignorance, and 'Asi bin Wail owed me some
     money. I went to him to demand it, but he said to
     me, "I will not pay you unless you reject faith in
     Muhammad." I replied, "By Allah, I will never
     disbelieve Muhammad till Allah let you die and
     then resurrect you." He said, "Then wait till I die
     and come to life again, for then I will be given
     property and offspring and will pay your right."
     So, thus revelation came: "Have you seen him
     who disbelieved in Our signs and yet says, 'I will
     be given property and offspring?' " (19.77) 


 Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 42: 

   Lost Things Picked up by
       Someone (Luqaata) 



Volume 3, Book 42, Number 608: 

     Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b: 

     I found a purse containing one hundred Diners.
     So I went to the Prophet (and informed him
     about it), he said, "Make public announcement
     about it for one year" I did so, but nobody turned
     up to claim it, so I again went to the Prophet who
     said, "Make public announcement for another
     year." I did, but none turned up to claim it. I went
     to him for the third time and he said, "Keep the
     container and the string which is used for its tying
     and count the money it contains and if its owner
     comes, give it to him; otherwise, utilize it." 

     The sub-narrator Salama said, "I met him
     (Suwaid, another sub-narrator) in Mecca and he
     said, 'I don't know whether Ubai made the
     announcement for three years or just one year.' " 


Volume 3, Book 42, Number 609: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani: 

     A bedouin went to the Prophet and asked him
     about picking up a lost thing. The Prophet said,
     "Make public announcement about it for one
     year. Remember the description of its container
     and the string with which it is tied; and if
     somebody comes and claims it and describes it
     correctly, (give it to him); otherwise, utilize it." He
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! What about a lost
     sheep?" The Prophet said, "It is for you, for your
     brother (i.e. its owner), or for the wolf." He
     further asked, "What about a lost camel?" On
     that the face of the Prophet became red (with
     anger) and said, "You have nothing to do with it,
     as it has its feet, its water reserve and can reach
     places of water and drink, and eat trees." 


Volume 3, Book 42, Number 610: 

     Narrated Sulaiman bin Bilal from Yahya: 

     Yazid Maula Al-Munba'ith heard Zaid bin Khalid
     al-Juham saying, "The Prophet was asked about
     Luqata. He said, 'Remember the description of
     its container and the string it is tied with, and
     announce it publicly for one year.' " Yazid added,
     "If nobody claims then the person who has found
     it can spend it, and it is regarded as a trust
     entrusted to him." Yahya said, "I do not know
     whether the last sentences were said by the
     Prophet or by Yazid." Zaid further said, "The
     Prophet was asked, 'What about a lost sheep?'
     The Prophet said, 'Take it, for it is for you or for
     your brother (i.e. its owner) or for the wolf."
     Yazid added that it should also be announced
     publicly. The man then asked the Prophet about
     a lost camel. The Prophet said, "Leave it, as it
     has its feet, water container (reservoir), and it will
     reach a place of water and eat trees till its owner
     finds it." 


Volume 3, Book 42, Number 611: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid: 

     A man came and asked Allah's Apostle about
     picking a lost thing. The Prophet said,
     "Remember the description of its container and
     the string it is tied with, and make public
     announcement about it for one year. If the owner
     shows up, give it to him; otherwise, do whatever
     you like with it." He then asked, "What about a
     lost sheep?" The Prophet said, "It is for you, for
     your brother (i.e. its owner), or for the wolf." He
     further asked, "What about a lost camel?" The
     Prophet said, "It is none of your concern. It has
     its water-container (reservoir) and its feet, and it
     will reach water and drink it and eat the trees till
     its owner finds it." 


Volume 3, Book 42, Number 612: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet passed a date fallen on the way and
     said, "Were I not afraid that it may be from a
     Sadaqa (charitable gifts), I would have eaten it." 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said,
     "Sometimes when I return home and find a date
     fallen on my bed, I pick it up in order to eat it,
     but I fear that it might be from a Sadaqa, so I
     throw it." 


Volume 3, Book 42, Number 613: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     When Allah gave victory to His Apostle over the
     people of Mecca, Allah's Apostle stood up
     among the people and after glorifying Allah, said,
     "Allah has prohibited fighting in Mecca and has
     given authority to His Apostle and the believers
     over it, so fighting was illegal for anyone before
     me, and was made legal for me for a part of a
     day, and it will not be legal for anyone after me.
     Its game should not be chased, its thorny bushes
     should not be uprooted, and picking up its fallen
     things is not allowed except for one who makes
     public announcement for it, and he whose relative
     is murdered has the option either to accept a
     compensation for it or to retaliate." Al-'Abbas
     said, "Except Al-ldhkhir, for we use it in our
     graves and houses." Allah's Apostle said,
     "Except Al-ldhkhir." Abu Shah, a Yemenite,
     stood up and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Get it
     written for me." Allah's Apostle said, "Write it for
     Abu Shah." (The sub-narrator asked Al-Auza'i):
     What did he mean by saying, "Get it written, O
     Allah's Apostle?" He replied, "The speech which
     he had heard from Allah's Apostle ." 


Volume 3, Book 42, Number 614: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "An animal should not be
     milked without the permission of its owner. Does
     any of you like that somebody comes to his store
     and breaks his container and takes away his
     food? The udders of the animals are the stores of
     their owners where their provision is kept, so
     nobody should milk the animals of somebody
     else, without the permission of its owner." 


Volume 3, Book 42, Number 615: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani: 

     A man asked Allah's Apostle about the Luqata.
     He said, "Make public announcement of it for
     one year, then remember the description of its
     container and the string it is tied with, utilize the
     money, and if its owner comes back after that,
     give it to him." The people asked, "O Allah's
     Apostle! What about a lost sheep?" Allah's
     Apostle said, "Take it, for it is for you, for your
     brother, or for the wolf." The man asked, "O
     Allah's Apostle! What about a lost camel?"
     Allah's Apostle got angry and his cheeks or face
     became red, and said, "You have no concern
     with it as it has its feet, and its water-container,
     till its owner finds it." 


Volume 3, Book 42, Number 616: 

     Narrated Suwaid bin Ghafala: 

     While I as in the company of Salman bin Rabi'a
     and Suhan, in one of the holy battles, I found a
     whip. One of them told me to drop it but I
     refused to do so and said that I would give it to
     its owner if I found him, otherwise I would utilize
     it. On our return we performed Hajj and on
     passing by Medina, I asked Ubai bin Ka'b about
     it. He said, "I found a bag containing a hundred
     Dinars in the lifetime of the Prophet and took it to
     the Prophet who said to me, 'Make public
     announcement about it for one year.' So, I
     announced it for one year and went to the
     Prophet who said, 'Announce it publicly for
     another year.' So, I announced it for another
     year. I went to him again and he said, "Announce
     for an other year." So I announced for still
     another year. I went to the Prophet for the fourth
     time, and he said, 'Remember the amount of
     money, the description of its container and the
     string it is tied with, and if the owner comes, give
     it to him; otherwise, utilize it.' " 


Volume 3, Book 42, Number 617: 

     Narrated Salama: 

     the above narration (Hadith 616) from Ubai bin
     Ka'b: adding, "I met the sub-narrator at Mecca
     later on, but he did not remember whether Ka'b
     had announced what he had found one year or
     three years." 


Volume 3, Book 42, Number 618: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid: 

     A bedouin asked the Prophet about the Luqata.
     The Prophet said, "Make public announcement
     about it for one year and if then somebody
     comes and describes the container of the Luqata
     and the string it was tied with, (give it to him);
     otherwise, spend it." He then asked the Prophet
     about a lost camel. The face of the Prophet
     become red and he said, "You have o concern
     with it as it has its water reservoir and feet and it
     will reach water and drink and eat trees. Leave it
     till its owner finds it." He then asked the Prophet
     about a lost sheep. The Prophet said, "It is for
     you, for your brother, or for the wolf." 


Volume 3, Book 42, Number 619: 

     Narrated Abu Bakr: 

     While I was on my way, all of a sudden I saw a
     shepherd driving his sheep, I asked him whose
     servant he was. He replied that he was the
     servant of a man from Quraish, and then he
     mentioned his name and I recognized him. I
     asked, "Do your sheep have some milk?" He
     replied in the affirmative. I said, "Are you going
     to milk for me?" He replied in the affirmative. I
     ordered him and he tied the legs of one of the
     sheep. Then I told him to clean the udder (teats)
     of dust and to remove dust off his hands. He
     removed the dust off his hands by clapping his
     hands. He then milked a little milk. I put the milk
     for Allah's Apostle in a pot and closed its mouth
     with a piece of cloth and poured water over it till
     it became cold. I took it to the Prophet and said,
     "Drink, O Allah's Apostle!" He drank it till I was
     pleased. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 43: 

             Oppressions 



Volume 3, Book 43, Number 620: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When the believers pass
     safely over (the bridge across) Hell, they will be
     stopped at a bridge in between Hell and Paradise
     where they will retaliate upon each other for the
     injustices done among them in the world, and
     when they get purified of all their sins, they will
     be admitted into Paradise. By Him in Whose
     Hands the life of Muhammad is everybody will
     recognize his dwelling in Paradise better than he
     recognizes his dwelling in this world." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 621: 

     Narrated Safwan bin Muhriz Almazini: 

     While I was walking with Ibn 'Umar holding his
     hand, a man came in front of us and asked,
     "What have you heard from Allah's Apostle
     about An-Najwa?" Ibn 'Umar said, "I heard
     Allah's Apostle saying, 'Allah will bring a believer
     near Him and shelter him with His Screen and
     ask him: Did you commit such-and-such sins? He
     will say: Yes, my Lord. Allah will keep on asking
     him till he will confess all his sins and will think
     that he is ruined. Allah will say: 'I did screen your
     sins in the world and I forgive them for you
     today', and then he will be given the book of his
     good deeds. Regarding infidels and hypocrites
     (their evil acts will be exposed publicly) and the
     witnesses will say: These are the people who lied
     against their Lord. Behold! The Curse of Allah is
     upon the wrongdoers." (11.18) 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 622: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A Muslim is a brother of
     another Muslim, so he should not oppress him,
     nor should he hand him over to an oppressor.
     Whoever fulfilled the needs of his brother, Allah
     will fulfill his needs; whoever brought his
     (Muslim) brother out of a discomfort, Allah will
     bring him out of the discomforts of the Day of
     Resurrection, and whoever screened a Muslim,
     Allah will screen him on the Day of Resurrection
     . " 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 623: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Help your brother, whether
     he is an oppressor or he is an oppressed one." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 624: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Help your brother, whether
     he is an oppressor or he is an oppressed one.
     People asked, "O Allah's Apostle! It is all right to
     help him if he is oppressed, but how should we
     help him if he is an oppressor?" The Prophet
     said, "By preventing him from oppressing others."


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 625: 

     Narrated Muawiya bin Suwald: 

     I heard Al-Bara' bin 'Azib saying, "The Prophet
     orders us to do seven things and prohibited us
     from doing seven other things." Then Al-Bara'
     mentioned the following:-- 

     (1) To pay a visit to the sick (inquiring about his
     health), 

     (2) to follow funeral processions, 

     (3) to say to a sneezer, "May Allah be merciful to
     you" (if he says, "Praise be to Allah!"), 

     (4) to return greetings, 

     (5) to help the oppressed, 

     (6) to accept invitations, 

     (7) to help others to fulfill their oaths. (See
     Hadith No. 753, Vol. 7) 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 626: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "A believer to another believer
     is like a building whose different parts enforce
     each other." The Prophet then clasped his hands
     with the fingers interlaced (while saying that). 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 627: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "Oppression will be a
     darkness on the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 628: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet sent Mu'adh to Yemen and said,
     "Be afraid, from the curse of the oppressed as
     there is no screen between his invocation and
     Allah." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 629: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever has oppressed
     another person concerning his reputation or
     anything else, he should beg him to forgive him
     before the Day of Resurrection when there will
     be no money (to compensate for wrong deeds),
     but if he has good deeds, those good deeds will
     be taken from him according to his oppression
     which he has done, and if he has no good deeds,
     the sins of the oppressed person will be loaded
     on him." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 630: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Regarding the explanation of the following
     verse:-- "If a wife fears Cruelty or desertion On
     her husband's part." (4.128) A man may dislike
     his wife and intend to divorce her, so she says to
     him, "I give up my rights, so do not divorce me."
     The above verse was revealed concerning such a
     case. 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 631: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi: 

     A drink (milk mixed with water) was brought to
     Allah's Apostle who drank some of it. A boy
     was sitting to his right, and some old men to his
     left. Allah's Apostle said to the boy, "Do you
     allow me to give the rest of the drink to these
     people?" The boy said, "O Allah's Apostle! I will
     not give preference to anyone over me to drink
     the rest of it from which you have drunk." Allah's
     Apostle then handed the bowl (of drink) to the
     boy. (See Hadith No. 541). 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 632: 

     Narrated Said bin Zaid: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever usurps the land
     of somebody unjustly, his neck will be encircled
     with it down the seven earths (on the Day of
     Resurrection). " 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 633: 

     Narrated Abu Salama: 

     That there was a dispute between him and some
     people (about a piece of land). When he told
     'Aisha about it, she said, "O Abu Salama! Avoid
     taking the land unjustly, for the Prophet said,
     'Whoever usurps even one span of the land of
     somebody, his neck will be encircled with it
     down the seven earths." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 634: 

     Narrated Salim's father (i.e. 'Abdullah): 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever takes a piece of the
     land of others unjustly, he will sink down the
     seven earths on the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 635: 

     Narrated Jabala: 

     "We were in Medina with some of the Iraqi
     people, and we were struck with famine and Ibn
     Az-Zubair used to give us dates. Ibn 'Umar used
     to pass by and say, "The Prophet forbade us to
     eat two dates at a time, unless one takes the
     permission of one's companions." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 636: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud: 

     There was an Ansari man called Abu Shu'aib
     who had a slave butcher. Abu Shu'aib said to
     him, "Prepare a meal sufficient for five persons so
     that I might invite the Prophet besides other four
     persons." Abu Shu'aib had seen the signs of
     hunger on the face of the Prophet and so he
     invited him. Another man who was not invited,
     followed the Prophet. The Prophet said to Abu
     Shu'aib, "This man has followed us. Do you
     allow him to share the meal?" Abu Shu'aib said,
     "Yes." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 637: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "The most hated person in the
     sight of Allah is the most quarrelsome person." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 638: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle heard
     some people quarreling at the door of his
     dwelling. He came out and said, "I am only a
     human being, and opponents come to me (to
     settle their problems); maybe someone amongst
     you can present his case more eloquently than
     the other, whereby I may consider him true and
     give a verdict in his favor. So, If I give the right of
     a Muslim to another by mistake, then it is really a
     portion of (Hell) Fire, he has the option to take
     or give up (before the Day of Resurrection)." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 639: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever has (the following)
     four characters will be a hypocrite, and whoever
     has one of the following four characteristics will
     have one characteristic of hypocrisy until he gives
     it up. These are: (1 ) Whenever he talks, he tells
     a lie; (2) whenever he makes a promise, he
     breaks it; (3) whenever he makes a covenant he
     proves treacherous; (4) and whenever he
     quarrels, he behaves impudently in an evil
     insulting manner." (See Hadith No. 33 Vol. 1) 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 640: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Hind bint 'Utba (Abu Sufyan's wife) came and
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! Abu Sufyan is a miser.
     Is there any harm if I spend something from his
     property for our children?" He said, there is no
     harm for you if you feed them from it justly and
     reasonably (with no extravagance)." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 641: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir: 

     We staid to the Prophet, "You send us out and it
     happens that we have to stay with such people as
     do not entertain us. What do you think about it?
     He said to us, "If you stay with some people and
     they entertain you as they should for a guest,
     accept their hospitality, but If they don't do, take
     the right of the guest from them." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 642: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     When Allah took away the soul of His Prophet at
     his death, the Ansar assembled In the shed of
     Bani Sa'ida. I said to Abu Bakr, "Let us go." So,
     we come to them (i.e. to Ansar) at the shed of
     Bani Sa'ida. (See Hadith No. 19, Vol. 5 for
     details) 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 643: 

     Narrated Al-Araj: 

     Abu Huraira said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'No-one
     should prevent his neighbor from fixing a wooden
     peg in his wall." Abu Huraira said (to his
     companions), "Why do I find you averse to it?
     By Allah, I certainly will narrate it to you." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 644: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I was the butler of the people in the house of
     Abu Talha, and in those days drinks were
     prepared from dates. Allah's Apostle ordered
     somebody to announce that alcoholic drinks had
     been prohibited. Abu Talha ordered me to go
     out and spill the wine. I went out and spilled it,
     and it flowed in the streets of Medina. Some
     people said, "Some people were killed and wine
     was still in their stomachs." On that the Divine
     revelation came:-- "On those who believe And
     do good deeds There is no blame For what they
     ate (in the past)." (5.93) 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 645: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet said, "Beware! Avoid sitting on he
     roads (ways)." The people said, "There is no
     way out of it as these are our sitting places where
     we have talks." The Prophet said, "If you must sit
     there, then observe the rights of the way." They
     asked, "What are the rights of the way?" He said,
     "They are the lowering of your gazes (on seeing
     what is illegal to look at), refraining from harming
     people, returning greetings, advocating good and
     forbidding evil." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 646: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A man felt very thirsty while
     he was on the way, there he came across a well.
     He went down the well, quenched his thirst and
     came out. Meanwhile he saw a dog panting and
     licking mud because of excessive thirst. He said
     to himself, "This dog is suffering from thirst as I
     did." So, he went down the well again and filled
     his shoe with water and watered it. Allah thanked
     him for that deed and forgave him. The people
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! Is there a reward for us
     in serving the animals?" He replied: "Yes, there is
     a reward for serving any animate (living being)."
     (See Hadith No. 551) 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 647: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     Once the Prophet stood at the top of one of the
     castles (or higher buildings) of Medina and said,
     "Do you see what I see? No doubt I am seeing
     the spots of afflictions amongst your houses as
     numerous as the spots where rain-drops fall
     (during a heavy rain). (See Hadith No. 102) 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 648: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     I had been eager to ask 'Umar about the two
     ladies from among the wives of the Prophet
     regarding whom Allah said (in the Qur'an saying):
     If you two (wives of the Prophet namely Aisha
     and Hafsa) turn in repentance to Allah your
     hearts are indeed so inclined (to oppose what the
     Prophet likes) (66.4), till performed the Hajj
     along with 'Umar (and on our way back from
     Hajj) he went aside (to answer the call of nature)
     and I also went aside along with him carrying a
     tumbler of water. When he had answered the call
     of nature and returned. I poured water on his
     hands from the tumbler and he performed
     ablution. I said, "O Chief of the believers! ' Who
     were the two ladies from among the wives of the
     Prophet to whom Allah said: 

     'If you two return in repentance (66.4)? He said,
     "I am astonished at your question, O Ibn 'Abbas.
     They were Aisha and Hafsa." 

     Then 'Umar went on relating the narration and
     said. "I and an Ansari neighbor of mine from Bani
     Umaiya bin Zaid who used to live in 'Awali
     Al-Medina, used to visit the Prophet in turns. He
     used to go one day, and I another day. When I
     went I would bring him the news of what had
     happened that day regarding the instructions and
     orders and when he went, he used to do the
     same for me. We, the people of Quraish, used to
     have authority over women, but when we came
     to live with the Ansar, we noticed that the Ansari
     women had the upper hand over their men, so
     our women started acquiring the habits of the
     Ansari women. Once I shouted at my wife and
     she paid me back in my coin and I disliked that
     she should answer me back. She said, 'Why do
     you take it ill that I retort upon you? By Allah,
     the wives of the Prophet retort upon him, and
     some of them may not speak with him for the
     whole day till night.' What she said scared me
     and I said to her, 'Whoever amongst them does
     so, will be a great loser.' Then I dressed myself
     and went to Hafsa and asked her, 'Does any of
     you keep Allah's Apostle angry all the day long
     till night?' She replied in the affirmative. I said,
     'She is a ruined losing person (and will never
     have success)! Doesn't she fear that Allah may
     get angry for the anger of Allah's Apostle and
     thus she will be ruined? Don't ask Allah's Apostle
     too many things, and don't retort upon him in any
     case, and don't desert him. Demand from me
     whatever you like, and don't be tempted to
     imitate your neighbor (i.e. 'Aisha) in her behavior
     towards the Prophet), for she (i.e. Aisha) is more
     beautiful than you, and more beloved to Allah's
     Apostle. 

     In those days it was rumored that Ghassan, (a
     tribe living in Sham) was getting prepared their
     horses to invade us. My companion went (to the
     Prophet on the day of his turn, went and returned
     to us at night and knocked at my door violently,
     asking whether I was sleeping. I was scared (by
     the hard knocking) and came out to him. He said
     that a great thing had happened. I asked him:
     What is it? Have Ghassan come? He replied that
     it was worse and more serious than that, and
     added that Allah's Apostle had divorced all his
     wives. I said, Hafsa is a ruined loser! I expected
     that would happen some day.' So I dressed
     myself and offered the Fajr prayer with the
     Prophet. Then the Prophet entered an upper
     room and stayed there alone. I went to Hafsa
     and found her weeping. I asked her, 'Why are
     you weeping? Didn't I warn you? Have Allah's
     Apostle divorced you all?' She replied, 'I don't
     know. He is there in the upper room.' I then went
     out and came to the pulpit and found a group of
     people around it and some of them were
     weeping. Then I sat with them for some time, but
     could not endure the situation. So I went to the
     upper room where the Prophet was and
     requested to a black slave of his: "Will you get
     the permission of (Allah's Apostle) for Umar (to
     enter)? The slave went in, talked to the Prophet
     about it and came out saying, 'I mentioned you to
     him but he did not reply.' So, I went and sat with
     the people who were sitting by the pulpit, but I
     could not bear the situation, so I went to the
     slave again and said: "Will you get he permission
     for Umar? He went in and brought the same
     reply as before. When I was leaving, behold, the
     slave called me saying, "Allah's Apostle has
     granted you permission." So, I entered upon the
     Prophet and saw him lying on a mat without
     wedding on it, and the mat had left its mark on
     the body of the Prophet, and he was leaning on a
     leather pillow stuffed with palm fires. I greeted
     him and while still standing, I said: "Have you
     divorced your wives?' He raised his eyes to me
     and replied in the negative. And then while still
     standing, I said chatting: "Will you heed what I
     say, 'O Allah's Apostle! We, the people of
     Quraish used to have the upper hand over our
     women (wives), and when we came to the
     people whose women had the upper hand over
     them..." 

     'Umar told the whole story (about his wife). "On
     that the Prophet smiled." 'Umar further said, "I
     then said, 'I went to Hafsa and said to her: Do
     not be tempted to imitate your companion
     ('Aisha) for she is more beautiful than you and
     more beloved to the Prophet.' The Prophet
     smiled again. When I saw him smiling, I sat down
     and cast a glance at the room, and by Allah, I
     couldn't see anything of importance but three
     hides. I said (to Allah's Apostle) "Invoke Allah to
     make your followers prosperous for the Persians
     and the Byzantines have been made prosperous
     and given worldly luxuries, though they do not
     worship Allah?' The Prophet was leaning then
     (and on hearing my speech he sat straight) and
     said, 'O Ibn Al-Khatttab! Do you have any
     doubt (that the Hereafter is better than this
     world)? These people have been given rewards
     of their good deeds in this world only.' I asked
     the Prophet . 'Please ask Allah's forgiveness for
     me. The Prophet did not go to his wives because
     of the secret which Hafsa had disclosed to
     'Aisha, and he said that he would not go to his
     wives for one month as he was angry with them
     when Allah admonished him (for his oath that he
     would not approach Maria). When twenty-nine
     days had passed, the Prophet went to Aisha first
     of all. She said to him, 'You took an oath that
     you would not come to us for one month, and
     today only twenty-nine days have passed, as I
     have been counting them day by day.' The
     Prophet said, 'The month is also of twenty-nine
     days.' That month consisted of twenty-nine days.
     'Aisha said, 'When the Divine revelation of
     Choice was revealed, the Prophet started with
     me, saying to me, 'I am telling you something, but
     you needn't hurry to give the reply till you can
     consult your parents." 'Aisha knew that her
     parents would not advise her to part with the
     Prophet . The Prophet said that Allah had said:--

     'O Prophet! Say To your wives; If you desire
     The life of this world And its glitter, ... then
     come! I will make a provision for you and set
     you free In a handsome manner. But if you seek
     Allah And His Apostle, and The Home of the
     Hereafter, then Verily, Allah has prepared For
     the good-doers amongst you A great reward.'
     (33.28) 'Aisha said, 'Am I to consult my parents
     about this? I indeed prefer Allah, His Apostle,
     and the Home of the Hereafter.' After that the
     Prophet gave the choice to his other wives and
     they also gave the same reply as 'Aisha did." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 649: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle took an oath that he would not
     go to his wives for one month as his foot had
     been sprained. He stayed in an upper room when
     'Umar went to him and said, "Have you divorced
     your wives?" He said, "No, but I have taken an
     oath that I would not go to them for one month."
     The Prophet stayed there for twenty-nine days,
     and then came down and went to his wives. 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 650: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet entered the Mosque, and I too went
     there after tying the camel at the pavement of the
     Mosque. I said (to the Prophet ), "This is your
     camel." He came out and started examining the
     camel and said, "Both the camel and its price are
     for you." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 651: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle coming (or the Prophet
     came) to the dumps of some people and urinated
     there while standing . 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 652: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "While a man was on the
     way, he found a thorny branch of a tree there on
     the way and removed it. Allah thanked him for
     that deed and forgave him." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 653: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet judged that seven cubits should be
     left as a public way when there was a dispute
     about the land. 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 654: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Yazid Al-Ansari: 

     The Prophet forbade robbery (taking away what
     belongs to others without their permission), and
     also forbade mutilation (or maiming) of bodies. 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 655: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "When an adulterer commits
     illegal sexual intercourse, then he is not a believer
     at the time, he is doing it, and when a drinker of
     an alcoholic liquor drinks it, then he is not a
     believer at the time of drinking it, and when a
     thief steals, then he is not a believer at the time of
     stealing, and when a robber robs, and the people
     look at him, then he is not a believer at the time
     of doing robbery. 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 656: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The Hour will not be
     established until the son of Mary (i.e. Jesus)
     descends amongst you as a just ruler, he will
     break the cross, kill the pigs, and abolish the
     Jizya tax. Money will be in abundance so that
     nobody will accept it (as charitable gifts). 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 657: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     On the day of Khaibar the Prophet saw fires
     being lighted. He asked, "Why are these fires
     being lighted?" The people replied that they were
     cooking the meat of donkeys. He said, "Break
     the pots and throw away their contents." The
     people said, "Shall we throw away their contents
     and wash the pots (rather than break them)?" He
     said, "Wash them." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 658: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud: 

     The Prophet entered Mecca and (at that time)
     there were three hundred-and-sixty idols around
     the Ka'ba. He started stabbing the idols with a
     stick he had in his hand and reciting: "Truth
     (Islam) has come and Falsehood (disbelief) has
     vanished." 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 659: 

     Narrated Al-Qasim: 

     Aisha said that she hung a curtain decorated with
     pictures (of animates) on a cupboard. The
     Prophet tore that curtain and she turned it into
     two cushions which remained in the house for the
     Prophet to sit on. 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 660: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Whoever is killed
     while protecting his property then he is a martyr."


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 661: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     While the Prophet was with one of his wives, one
     of the mothers of the believers (i.e. one of his
     wives) sent a wooden bowl containing food with
     a servant. The wife (in whose house he was
     sitting) stroke the bowl with her hand and broke
     it. The Prophet collected the shattered pieces
     and put the food back in it and said, "Eat." He
     kept the servant and the bowl till he had eaten
     the food. Then the Prophet gave another
     unbroken. bowl to the servant and kept the
     broken one. 


Volume 3, Book 43, Number 662: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There was an Israeli man
     called Juraij, while he was praying, his mother
     came and called him, but he did not respond to
     her call. He said (to himself) whether he should
     continue the prayer or reply to his mother. She
     came to him the second time and called him and
     said, "O Allah! Do not let him die until he sees
     the faces of prostitutes." Juraij used to live in a
     hermitage. A woman said that she would entice
     Juraij, so she went to him and presented herself
     (for an evil act) but he refused. She then went to
     a shepherd and allowed him to commit an illegal
     sexual intercourse with her and later she gave
     birth to a boy. She alleged that the baby was
     from Juraij. The people went to Juraij and broke
     down his hermitage, pulled him out of it and
     abused him. He performed ablution and offered
     the prayer, then he went to the male (baby) and
     asked him; "O boy! Who is your father?" The
     baby replied that his father was the shepherd.
     The people said that they would build for him a
     hermitage of gold but Juraij asked them to make
     it of mud only." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 44: 

              Partnership 



Volume 3, Book 44, Number 663: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     "Allah's Apostle sent an army towards the east
     coast and appointed Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah
     as their chief, and the army consisted of
     three-hundred men including myself. We
     marched on till we reached a place where our
     food was about to finish. Abu- 'Ubaida ordered
     us to collect all the journey food and it was
     collected. My (our) journey food was dates. Abu
     'Ubaida kept on giving us our daily ration in small
     amounts from it, till it was exhausted. The share
     of everyone of us used to be one date only." I
     said, "How could one date benefit you?" Jabir
     replied, "We came to know its value when even
     that too finished." Jabir added, "When we
     reached the sea-shore, we saw a huge fish which
     was like a small mountain. The army ate from it
     for eighteen days. Then Abu 'Ubaida ordered
     that two of its ribs be fixed and they were fixed in
     the ground. Then he ordered that a she-camel be
     ridden and it passed under the two ribs (forming
     an arch) without touching them." 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 664: 

     Narrated Salama: 

     Once the journey food diminished and the people
     were reduced to poverty. They went to the
     Prophet and asked his permission to slaughter
     their camels, and he agreed. 'Umar met them and
     they told him about it, and he said, "How would
     you survive after slaughtering your camels?" Then
     he went to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! How would they survive after
     slaughtering their camels?" Allah's Apostle
     ordered 'Umar, "Call upon the people to bring
     what has remained of their food." A leather sheet
     was spread and al I the journey food was
     collected and heaped over it. Allah's Apostle
     stood up and invoked Allah to bless it, and then
     directed all the people to come with their utensils,
     and they started taking from it till all of them got
     what was sufficient for them. Allah's Apostle then
     said, "I testify that None has the right to be
     worshipped but Allah, and I am His Apostle. " 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 665: 

     Narrated Rafi bin Khadij: 

     We used to offer the 'Asr prayer with the
     Prophet and slaughter a camel, the meat of which
     would be divided in ten parts. We would eat the
     cooked meat before sunset. 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 666: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "When the people of Ash'ari
     tribe ran short of food during the holy battles, or
     the food of their families in Medina ran short,
     they would collect all their remaining food in one
     sheet and then distribute it among themselves
     equally by measuring it with a bowl. So, these
     people are from me, and I am from them." 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 667: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     that Abu Bakr As-Siddiq wrote to him the law of
     Zakat which was made obligatory by Allah's
     Apostle. He wrote: 'Partners possessing joint
     property (sheep) have to pay its Zakat equally. 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 668: 

     Narrated 'Abaya bin Rafa'a bin Raft' bin Khadij: 

     My grandfather said, "We were in the company
     of the Prophet at Dhul-Hulaifa. The people felt
     hungry and captured some camels and sheep (as
     booty). The Prophet was behind the people.
     They hurried and slaughtered the animals and put
     their meat in pots and started cooking it. (When
     the Prophet came) he ordered the pots to be
     upset and then he distributed the animals (of the
     booty), regarding ten sheep as equal to one
     camel. One of the camels fled and the people ran
     after it till they were exhausted. At that time there
     were few horses. A man threw an arrow at the
     camel, and Allah stopped the camel with it. The
     Prophet said, "Some of these animals are like
     wild animals, so if you lose control over one of
     these animals, treat it in this way (i.e. shoot it with
     an arrow)." Before distributing them among the
     soldiers my grandfather said, "We may meet the
     enemies in the future and have no knives; can we
     slaughter the animals with reeds?" The Prophet
     said, "Use whatever causes blood to flow, and
     eat the animals if the name of Allah has been
     mentioned on slaughtering them. Do not slaughter
     with teeth or fingernails and I will tell you why: It
     is because teeth are bones (i.e. cannot cut
     properly) and fingernails are the tools used by the
     Ethiopians (whom we should not imitate for they
     are infidels)." 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 669: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet decreed that one should not eat two
     dates together at a time unless he gets the
     permission from his companions (sharing the
     meal with him). 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 670: 

     Narrated Jabala: 

     "While at Medina we were struck with famine.
     Ibn Az-Zubair used to provide us with dates as
     our food. Ibn 'Umar used to pass by us and say,
     "Don't eat two dates together at a time as the
     Prophet has forbidden eating two dates together
     at a time (in a gathering) unless one takes the
     permission of one's companion brother." 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 671: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'If one
     manumits his share of a jointly possessed slave,
     and can afford the price of the other shares
     according to the adequate price of the slave, the
     slave will be completely manumitted; otherwise
     he will be partially manumitted.' " (Aiyub, a
     sub-narrator is not sure whether the saying " ...
     otherwise he will be partially manumitted" was
     said by Nafi' or the Prophet.) 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 672: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever manumits his share
     of a jointly possessed slave, it is imperative for
     him to get that slave manumitted completely by
     paying the remaining price, and if he does not
     have sufficient money to manumit him, then the
     price of the slave should be estimated justly, and
     he is to be allowed to work and earn the amount
     that will manumit him (without overburdening
     him)". 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 673: 

     Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir: 

     The Prophet said, "The example of the person
     abiding by Allah's order and restrictions in
     comparison to those who violate them is like the
     example of those persons who drew lots for their
     seats in a boat. Some of them got seats in the
     upper part, and the others in the lower. When the
     latter needed water, they had to go up to bring
     water (and that troubled the others), so they said,
     'Let us make a hole in our share of the ship (and
     get water) saving those who are above us from
     troubling them. So, if the people in the upper part
     left the others do what they had suggested, all the
     people of the ship would be destroyed, but if
     they prevented them, both parties would be
     safe." 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 674: 

     Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 

     That he had asked 'Aisha about the meaning of
     the Statement of Allah: "If you fear that you shall
     not Be able to deal justly With the orphan girls,
     then Marry (Other) women of your choice Two
     or three or four." (4.3) 

     She said, "O my nephew! This is about the
     orphan girl who lives with her guardian and
     shares his property. Her wealth and beauty may
     tempt him to marry her without giving her an
     adequate Mahr (bridal-money) which might have
     been given by another suitor. So, such guardians
     were forbidden to marry such orphan girls unless
     they treated them justly and gave them the most
     suitable Mahr; otherwise they were ordered to
     marry any other woman." 'Aisha further said,
     "After that verse the people again asked the
     Prophet (about the marriage with orphan 'girls),
     so Allah revealed the following verses:-- 'They
     ask your instruction Concerning the women. Say:
     Allah Instructs you about them And about what
     is Recited unto you In the Book, concerning The
     orphan girls to whom You give not the
     prescribed portions and yet whom you Desire to
     marry..." (4.127) 

     What is meant by Allah's Saying:-- 'And about
     what is Recited unto you is the former verse
     which goes:-- 'If you fear that you shall not Be
     able to deal justly With the orphan girls, then
     Marry (other) women of your choice.' (4.3)
     'Aisha said, "Allah's saying in the other
     verse:--'Yet whom you desire to marry' (4.127)
     means the desire of the guardian to marry an
     orphan girl under his supervision when she has
     not much property or beauty (in which case he
     should treat her justly). The guardians were
     forbidden to marry their orphan girls possessing
     property and beauty without being just to them,
     as they generally refrain from marrying them
     (when they are neither beautiful nor wealthy)." 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 675: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet established the right of Shu'fa (i.e.
     Pre-emption) in joint properties; but when the
     land is divided and the ways are demarcated,
     then there is no pre-emption. 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 676: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "The right of pre-emption is
     valid in every joint property, but when the land is
     divided and the way is demarcated, then there is
     no right of pre-emption." 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 677: 

     Narrated Sulaiman bin Abu Muslim: 

     I asked Abu Minhal about money exchange from
     hand to hand. He said, "I and a partner of mine
     bought something partly in cash and partly on
     credit." Al-Bara' bin 'Azib passed by us and we
     asked about it. He replied, "I and my partner
     Zaid bin Al-Arqam did the same and then went
     to the Prophet and asked him about it. He said,
     'Take what was from hand to hand and leave
     what was on credit.' " 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 678: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle rented the land of Khaibar to the
     Jews on the condition that they would work on it
     and cultivate it and take half of its yield. 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 679: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir: 

     that Allah's Apostle gave him some sheep to
     distribute among his companions in order to
     sacrifice them and a kid was left. He told the
     Prophet about it and the Prophet said to him,
     "Sacrifice it on your behalf." 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 680: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Hisham: 

     that his mother Zainab bint Humaid took him to
     the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Take
     the pledge of allegiance from him." But he said,
     "He is still too young for the pledge," and passed
     his hand on his (i.e. 'Abdullah's) head and
     invoked for Allah's blessing for him. Zuhra bin
     Ma'bad stated that he used to go with his
     grandfather, 'Abdullah bin Hisham, to the market
     to buy foodstuff. Ibn 'Umar and Ibn Az-Zubair
     would meet him and say to him, "Be our partner,
     as the Prophet invoked Allah to bless you." So,
     he would be their partner, and very often he
     would win a camel's load and send it home. 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 681: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever manumits his share
     o a jointly possessed slave, it is imperative on
     him to manumit the slave completely if he has
     sufficient money to pay the rest of its price which
     is to be estimated justly. He should pay his
     partners their shares and release him (the freed
     one). 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 682: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever manumits his share
     of a jointly possessed slave, it is essential for him
     to manumit the slave completely if he has
     sufficient money. Otherwise he should look for
     some work for the slave (to earn what would
     enable him to emancipate himself), without
     overburdening him with work." 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 683: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet (along with his companions)
     reached Mecca in the morning of the fourth of
     Dhul-Hijja assuming Ihram for Hajj only. So
     when we arrived at Mecca, the Prophet ordered
     us to change our intentions of the Ihram for'Umra
     and that we could finish our Ihram after
     performing the 'Umra and could go to our wives
     (for sexual intercourse). The people began
     talking about that. Jabir said surprisingly, "Shall
     we go to Mina while semen is dribbling from our
     male organs?" Jabir moved his hand while saying
     so. When this news reached the Prophet he
     delivered a sermon and said, "I have been
     informed that some peoples were saying so and
     so; By Allah I fear Allah more than you do, and
     am more obedient to Him than you. If I had
     known what I know now, I would not have
     brought the Hadi (sacrifice) with me and had the
     Hadi not been with me, I would have finished the
     Ihram." At that Suraqa bin Malik stood up and
     asked "O Allah's Apostle! Is this permission for
     us only or is it forever?" The Prophet replied, "It
     is forever." In the meantime 'Ali bin Abu Talib
     came from Yemen and was saying Labbaik for
     what the Prophet has intended. (According to
     another man, 'Ali was saying Labbaik for Hajj
     similar to Allah's Apostle's). The Prophet told
     him to keep on the Ihram and let him share the
     Hadi with him. 


Volume 3, Book 44, Number 684: 

     Narrated Abaya bin Rifaa: 

     My grandfather, Rafi bin Khadij said, "We were
     in the valley of Dhul-Hulaifa of Tuhama in the
     company of the Prophet and had some camels
     and sheep (of the booty). The people hurried (in
     slaughtering the animals) and put their meat in the
     pots and started cooking. Allah's Apostle came
     and ordered them to upset the pots, and
     distributed the booty considering one camel as
     equal to ten sheep. One of the camels fled and
     the people had only a few horses, so they got
     worried. (The camel was chased and) a man
     slopped the camel by throwing an arrow at it.
     Allah's Apostle said, 'Some of these animals are
     untamed like wild animals, so if anyone of them
     went out of your control, then you should treat it
     as you have done now.' " My grandfather said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! We fear that we may meet
     our enemy tomorrow and we have no knives,
     could we slaughter the animals with reeds?" The
     Prophet said, "Yes, or you can use what would
     make blood flow (slaughter) and you can eat
     what is slaughtered and the Name of Allah is
     mentioned at the time of slaughtering. But don't
     use teeth or fingernails (in slaughtering). I will tell
     you why, as for teeth, they are bones, and
     fingernails are used by Ethiopians for
     slaughtering. (See Hadith 668) 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 45: 

              Mortgaging 



Volume 3, Book 45, Number 685: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     No doubt, the Prophet mortgaged his armor for
     barley grams. Once I took barley bread with
     some dissolved fat on it to the Prophet and I
     heard him saying, "The household of Muhammad
     did not possess except a Sa (of food grain,
     barley, etc.) for both the morning and the evening
     meals although they were nine houses." 


Volume 3, Book 45, Number 686: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet bought some foodstuff on credit for
     a limited period and mortgaged his armor for it. 


Volume 3, Book 45, Number 687: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Who would kill Ka'b bin
     Al-Ashraf as he has harmed Allah and His
     Apostle ?" Muhammad bin Maslama (got up
     and) said, "I will kill him." So, Muhammad bin
     Maslama went to Ka'b and said, "I want a loan
     of one or two Wasqs of food grains." Ka'b said,
     "Mortgage your women to me." Muhammad bin
     Maslama said, "How can we mortgage our
     women, and you are the most handsome among
     the Arabs?" He said, "Then mortgage your sons
     to me." Muhammad said, "How can we
     mortgage our sons, as the people will abuse them
     for being mortgaged for one or two Wasqs of
     food grains? It is shameful for us. But we will
     mortgage our arms to you." So, Muhammad bin
     Maslama promised him that he would come to
     him next time. They (Muhammad bin Maslama
     and his companions came to him as promised
     and murdered him. Then they went to the
     Prophet and told him about it. 


Volume 3, Book 45, Number 688: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "One can ride the mortgaged
     animal because of what one spends on it, and
     one can drink the milk of a milch animal as long
     as it is mortgaged. " 


Volume 3, Book 45, Number 689: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The mortgaged animal can
     be used for riding as long as it is fed and the milk
     of the milch animal can be drunk according to
     what one spend on it. The one who rides the
     animal or drinks its milk should provide the
     expenditures." 


Volume 3, Book 45, Number 690: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle bought some foodstuff from a
     Jew and mortgaged his armor to him. 


Volume 3, Book 45, Number 691: 

     Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika: 

     I wrote a letter to Ibn 'Abbas and he wrote to
     me that the Prophet had given the verdict that the
     defendant had to take an oath. 


Volume 3, Book 45, Number 692: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) said, "Whoever took a
     false oath in order to grab somebody's property
     will meet Allah while Allah will be angry with
     him." Allah revealed the following verse to
     confirm that:--"Verily! Those who purchase a
     small gain at the cost of Allah's covenant And
     their oaths...a painful torment." (3.77) 

     Al-Ash'ath bin Qais came to us and asked as to
     what Abu Abdur-Rehman (i.e. Ibn Mas'ud) was
     telling you." We related the story to him. On that
     he said, "He has told the truth. This verse was
     revealed about me. I had some dispute with
     another man regarding a well and we took the
     case before Allah's Apostle. Allah's Apostle said
     (to me), "Produce two witnesses (to support
     your claim); otherwise the defendant has the right
     to take an oath (to refute your claim).' I said,
     'The defendant would not mind to take a false
     oath." Allah's Apostle then said, 'Whoever took
     a false oath in order to grab someone else's
     property will meet Allah, Allah will be angry with
     him.' Allah then revealed what Confirmed it."
     Al-Ash'ath then recited the following
     Verse:--"Verily! Those who purchase a small
     gain at the cost of Allah's covenant, And their
     oaths . . . (to) . . . they shall have a painful
     torment!' (3.77) (See Hadith No. 546) 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 46: 

    Manumission of Slaves 



Volume 3, Book 46, Number 693: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever frees a Muslim
     slave, Allah will save all the parts of his body
     from the (Hell) Fire as he has freed the
     body-parts of the slave." Said bin Marjana said
     that he narrated that Hadith to 'Ali bin Al-Husain
     and he freed his slave for whom 'Abdullah bin
     Ja'far had offered him ten thousand Dirhams or
     one-thousand Dinars. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 694: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     I asked the Prophet, "What is the best deed?"
     He replied, "To believe in Allah and to fight for
     His Cause." I then asked, "What is the best kind
     of manumission (of slaves)?" He replied, "The
     manumission of the most expensive slave and the
     most beloved by his master." I said, "If I cannot
     afford to do that?" He said, "Help the weak or
     do good for a person who cannot work for
     himself." I said, "If I cannot do that?" He said,
     "Refrain from harming others for this will be
     regarded as a charitable deed for your own
     good." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 695: 

     Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr: 

     The Prophet ordered us to free slaves at the time
     of solar eclipses. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 696: 

     Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr: 

     We were ordered to free slaves at the time of
     lunar eclipses. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 697: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever manumits a slave
     owned by two masters, should manumit him
     completely (not partially) if he is rich after having
     its price evaluated." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 698: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever frees his share of
     a common slave and he has sufficient money to
     free him completely, should let its price be
     estimated by a just man and give his partners the
     price of their shares and manumit the slave;
     otherwise (i.e. if he has not sufficient money) he
     manumits the slave partially." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 699: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever manumits his
     share of a slave, then it is essential for him to get
     that slave manumitted' completely as long as he
     has the money to do so. If he has not sufficient
     money to pay the price of the other shares (after
     the price of the slave is evaluated justly), the
     manumitted manumits the slave partially in
     proportion to his share. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 700: 

     Narrated 'Ubaidullah: 

     as above BRIEFLY. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 701: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "He who manumits his share of
     a slave and has money sufficient to free the
     remaining portion of that slave's price (justly
     estimated) then he should manumit him (by giving
     the rest of his price to the other co-owners)."
     Nafi' added, "Otherwise the slave is partially
     free." Aiyub is not sure whether the last statement
     was said by Nafi' or it was a part of the Hadith. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 702: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     That he used to give his verdict regarding the
     male or female slaves owned by more than one
     master, one of whom may manumit his share of
     the slave. Ibn 'Umar used to say in such a case,
     "The manumitted should manumit the slave
     completely if he has sufficient money to pay the
     rest of the price of that slave (which is to be
     justly estimated) and the other share-holders are
     to take the price of their shares and the slave is
     freed (released from slavery)." Ibn 'Umar
     narrated this verdict from the Prophet. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 703: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     that the Prophet said, "Whoever frees his portion
     of a (common) slave." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 704: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever frees his portion of
     a common slave should free the slave completely
     by paying the rest of his price from his money if
     he has enough money; otherwise the price of the
     slave is to be estimated and the slave is to be
     helped to work without hardship till he pays the
     rest of his price." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 705: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah has accepted my
     invocation to forgive what whispers in the hearts
     of my followers, unless they put it to action or
     utter it." (See Hadith No. 657 Vol. 8) 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 706: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     The Prophet said, "The (reward of) deeds
     depend on intentions, and every person will get
     the reward according to what he intends. So,
     whoever migrated for Allah and His Apostle,
     then his migration will be for Allah and His
     Apostle, and whoever migrated for worldly
     benefits or for marrying a woman, then his
     migration will be for what he migrated for." (See
     Hadith No. 1, Vol. 1) 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 707: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     When Abu Huraira accompanied by his slave set
     out intending to embrace Islam they lost each
     other on the way. The slave then came while Abu
     Huraira was sitting with the Prophet. The
     Prophet said, "O Abu Huraira! Your slave has
     come back." Abu Huraira said, "Indeed, I would
     like you to witness that I have manumitted him."
     That happened at the time when Abu Huraira
     recited (the following poetic verse):-- 'What a
     long tedious tiresome night! Nevertheless, it has
     delivered us From the land of Kufr (disbelief). 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 708: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     On my way to the Prophet I was reciting:--
     'What a long tedious tiresome night!
     Nevertheless, it has saved us From the land of
     Kufr (disbelief).' I had a slave who ran away
     from me on the way. When I went to the Prophet
     and gave the pledge of allegiance for embracing
     Islam, the slave showed up while I was still with
     the Prophet who remarked, "O Abu Huraira!
     Here is your slave!" I said, "I manumit him for
     Allah's Sake," and so I freed him. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 709: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     When Abu Huraira accompanied by his slave
     came intending to embrace Islam, they lost each
     other on the way. (When the slave showed up)
     Abu Huraira said (to the Prophet), "I make you
     witness that the slave is free for Allah's Cause." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 710: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Utba bin Abi Waqqas authorized his brother Sad
     bin Abi Waqqas to take the son of the slave-girl
     of Zam'a into his custody, telling him that the boy
     was his own (illegal) son. When Allah's Apostle
     went (to Mecca) at the time of the Conquest,
     Sad took the son of the slavegirl of Zam'a to
     Allah's Apostle and also brought 'Abu bin Zam'a
     with him and said, "O Allah's Apostle! This is the
     son of my brother 'Utba who authorized me to
     take him into my custody." 'Abu bin Zam'a said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! He is my brother, the son of
     Zam'a' slave-girl and he was born on his bed."
     Allah's Apostle looked at the son of the slave-girl
     of Zam'a and noticed much resemblance (to
     'Utba). Allah's Apostle said, "It is for you, O
     'Abu bin Zam'a as he was born on the bed of
     your father." Allah's Apostle then told Sauda bint
     Zam'a to observe veil in the presence of the boy
     as he noticed the boy's resemblance to 'Utba and
     Sauda was the wife of the Prophet . 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 711: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     A man amongst us declared that his slave would
     be freed after his death. The Prophet called for
     that slave and sold him. The slave died the same
     year. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 712: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the selling or donating
     the Wala' of a freed slave. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 713: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I bought Buraira but her masters put the
     condition that her Wala' would be for them. I
     told the Prophet about it. He said (to me),
     "Manumit her as her Wala' will be for the one
     who pays the price." So, I manumitted her. The
     Prophet called Buraira and gave her the option of
     either staying with her husband or leaving him.
     She said, "Even if he gave me so much money, I
     would not stay with him," and so she preferred
     her freedom to her husband. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 714: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Some men of the Ansar asked for the permission
     of Allah's Apostle and said, "Allow us to give up
     the ransom from our nephew Al-'Abbas. The
     Prophet said (to them), "Do not leave (even) a
     Dirham (of his ransom)." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 715: 

     Narrated Hisham: 

     My father told me that Hakim bin Hizam
     manumitted one-hundred slaves in the pre-lslamic
     period of ignorance and slaughtered one-hundred
     camels (and distributed them in charity). When
     he embraced Islam he again slaughtered
     one-hundred camels and manumitted
     one-hundred slaves. Hakim said, "I asked Allah's
     Apostle, 'O Allah's Apostle! What do you think
     about some good deeds I used to practice in the
     prelslamic period of ignorance regarding them as
     deeds of righteousness?' Allah's Apostle said,
     "You have embraced Islam along with all those
     good deeds you did." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 716: 

     Narrated Marwan and Al-Miswar bin
     Makhrama: 

     When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin came
     to the Prophet and they requested him to return
     their properties and captives. The Prophet stood
     up and said to them, "I have other people with
     me in this matter (as you see) and the most
     beloved statement to me is the true one; you may
     choose either the properties or the prisoners as I
     have delayed their distribution." The Prophet had
     waited for them for more than ten days since his
     arrival from Ta'if. So, when it became evident to
     them that the Prophet was not going to return
     them except one of the two, they said, "We
     choose our prisoners." The Prophet got up
     amongst the people and glorified and praised
     Allah as He deserved and said, "Then after, these
     brethren of yours have come to us with
     repentance, and I see it logical to return them the
     captives. So, whoever amongst you likes to do
     that as a favor, then he can do it, and whoever of
     you likes to stick to his share till we recompense
     him from the very first war booty which Allah will
     give us, then he can do so (i.e. give up the
     present captives)." The people unanimously said,
     "We do that (return the captives) willingly." The
     Prophet said, "We do not know which of you
     has agreed to it and which have not, so go back
     and let your leaders forward us your decision."
     So, all the people then went back and discussed
     the matter with their leaders who returned and
     informed the Prophet that all the people had
     willingly given their consent to return the captives.
     This is what has reached us about the captives of
     Hawazin. Narrated Anas that 'Abbas said to the
     Prophet, "I paid for my ransom and Aqil's
     ransom." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 717: 

     Narrated Ibn Aun: 

     I wrote a letter to Nafi and Nafi wrote in reply to
     my letter that the Prophet had suddenly attacked
     Bani Mustaliq without warning while they were
     heedless and their cattle were being watered at
     the places of water. Their fighting men were
     killed and their women and children were taken
     as captives; the Prophet got Juwairiya on that
     day. Nafi said that Ibn 'Umar had told him the
     above narration and that Ibn 'Umar was in that
     army. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 718: 

     Narrated Ibn Muhairiz: 

     I saw Abu Said and asked him about coitus
     interruptus. Abu Said said, "We went with
     Allah's Apostle, in the Ghazwa of Barli
     Al-Mustaliq and we captured some of the 'Arabs
     as captives, and the long separation from our
     wives was pressing us hard and we wanted to
     practice coitus interruptus. We asked Allah's
     Apostle (whether it was permissible). He said, "It
     is better for you not to do so. No soul, (that
     which Allah has) destined to exist, up to the Day
     of Resurrection, but will definitely come, into
     existence." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 719: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I have loved the people of the tribe of Bani
     Tamim ever since I heard, three things, Allah's
     Apostle said about them. I heard him saying,
     These people (of the tribe of Bani Tamim) would
     stand firm against Ad-Dajjal." When the Sadaqat
     (gifts of charity) from that tribe came, Allah's
     Apostle said, "These are the Sadaqat (i.e.
     charitable gifts) of our folk." 'Aisha had a
     slave-girl from that tribe, and the Prophet said to
     'Aisha, "Manumit her as she is a descendant of
     Ishmael (the Prophet)." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 720: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "He who has a slave-girl
     and educates and treats her nicely and then
     manumits and marries her, will get a double
     reward." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 721: 

     Narrated Al-Ma'rur bin Suwaid: 

     I saw Abu Dhar Al-Ghifari wearing a cloak, and
     his slave, too, was wearing a cloak. We asked
     him about that (i.e. how both were wearing
     similar cloaks). He replied, "Once I abused a
     man and he complained of me to the Prophet .
     The Prophet asked me, 'Did you abuse him by
     slighting his mother?' He added, 'Your slaves are
     your brethren upon whom Allah has given you
     authority. So, if one has one's brethren under
     one's control, one should feed them with the like
     of what one eats and clothe them with the like of
     what one wears. You should not overburden
     them with what they cannot bear, and if you do
     so, help them (in their hard job)." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 722: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If a slave is honest and
     faithful to his master and worships his Lord
     (Allah) in a perfect manner, he will get a double
     reward." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 723: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari: 

     The Prophet said, "He who has a slave-girl and
     teaches her good manners and improves her
     education and then manumits and marries her,
     will get a double reward; and any slave who
     observes Allah's right and his master's right will
     get a double reward." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 724: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A pious slave gets a
     double reward." Abu Huraira added: By Him in
     Whose Hands my soul is but for Jihad (i.e. holy
     battles), Hajj, and my duty to serve my mother, I
     would have loved to die as a slave. 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 725: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Goodness and comfort are
     for him who worships his Lord in a perfect
     manner and serves his master sincerely." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 726: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "If a slave serves his Saiyid
     (i.e. master) sincerely and worships his Lord
     (Allah) perfectly, he will get a double reward." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 727: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "The Mamluk (slave) who
     worships his Lord in a perfect manner, and is
     dutiful, sincere and obedient to his Saiyid
     (master), will get a double reward." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 728: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "You should not say, 'Feed
     your lord (Rabbaka), help your lord in
     performing ablution, or give water to your lord,
     but should say, 'my master (e.g. Feed your
     master instead of lord etc.) (Saiyidi), or my
     guardian (Maulai), and one should not say, my
     slave (Abdi), or my girl-slave (Amati), but should
     say, my lad (Fatai), my lass (Fatati), and 'my boy
     (Ghulami)." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 729: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "If one manumits his share of a
     common slave (Abd), and he has money
     sufficient to free the remaining portion of the
     price of the slave (justly estimated), then he
     should free the slave completely by paying the
     rest of his price; otherwise the slave is freed
     partly. " 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 730: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Everyone of you is a
     guardian and is responsible for his charges. The
     ruler who has authority over people, is a guardian
     and is responsible for them, a man is a guardian
     of his family and is responsible for them; a
     woman is a guardian of her husband's house and
     children and is responsible for them; a slave
     ('Abu) is a guardian of his master's property and
     is responsible for it; so all of you are guardians
     and are responsible for your charges." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 731: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid: 

     The Prophet said, "If a slave-girl (Ama) commits
     illegal sexual intercourse, scourge her; if she does
     it again, scourge her again; if she repeats it,
     scourge her again." The narrator added that on
     the third or the fourth offence, the Prophet said,
     "Sell her even for a hair rope." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 732: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "When your servant brings
     your meals to you then if he does not let him sit
     and share the meals, then he should at least give
     him a mouthful or two mouthfuls of that meal or a
     meal or two meals, as he has prepared it." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 733: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Everyone
     of you is a guardian and is responsible for his
     charge; the ruler is a guardian and is responsible
     for his subjects; the man is a guardian in his
     family and responsible for his charges; a woman
     is a guardian of her husband's house and
     responsible for her charges; and the servant is a
     guardian of his master's property and is
     responsible for his charge." I definitely heard the
     above from the Prophet and think that the
     Prophet also said, "A man is a guardian of his
     father's property and responsible for his charges;
     so everyone of you is a guardian and responsible
     for his charges." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 734: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "If somebody fights (or beats
     somebody) then he should avoid the face." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 735: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     That 'Aisha told him that Buraira came to seek
     her help in her writing of emancipation (for a
     certain sum) and that time she had not paid
     anything of it. 'Aisha said to her, "Go back to
     your masters, and if they agree that I will pay the
     amount of your writing of emancipation and get
     your Wala', I will do so." Buraira informed her
     masters of that but they refused and said, "If she
     (i.e. 'Aisha) is seeking Allah's reward, then she
     can do so, but your Wala' will be for us." 'Aisha
     mentioned that to Allah's Apostle who said to
     her, "Buy and manumit her, as the Wala' is for
     the liberator." Allah's Apostle then got up and
     said, "What about the people who stipulate
     conditions which are not present in Allah's Laws?
     Whoever imposes conditions which are not
     present in Allah's Laws, then those conditions
     will be invalid, even if he imposed these
     conditions a hundred times. Allah's conditions
     (Laws) are the truth and are more solid." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 736: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Aisha wanted to buy a slave-girl in order to
     manumit her. The girl's masters stipulated that her
     Wala' would be for them. Allah's Apostle said
     (to 'Aisha), "What they stipulate should not stop
     you, for the Wala' is for the liberator." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 737: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Buraira came (to 'Aisha) and said, "I have made
     a contract of emancipation with my masters for
     nine Uqiyas (of gold) to be paid in yearly
     installments. Therefore, I seek your help." 'Aisha
     said, "If your masters agree, I will pay them the
     sum at once and free you on condition that your
     Wala' will be for me." Buraira went to her
     masters but they refused that offer. She (came
     back) and said, "I presented to them the offer but
     they refused, unless the Wala' was for them."
     Allah's Apostle heard of that and asked me
     about it, and I told him about it. On that he said,
     "Buy and manumit her and stipulate that the
     Wala' should be for you, as Wala' is for the
     liberator." 'Aisha added, "Allah's Apostle then
     got up amongst the people, Glorified and Praised
     Allah, and said, 'Then after: What about some
     people who impose conditions which are not
     present in Allah's Laws? So, any condition which
     is not present in Allah's Laws is invalid even if
     they were one-hundred conditions. Allah's
     ordinance is the truth, and Allah's condition is
     stronger and more solid. Why do some men from
     you say, O so-and-so! manumit the slave but the
     Wala will be for me? Verily, the Wala is for the
     liberator." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 738: 

     Narrated Amra bint 'AbdurRahman: 

     Buraira went to Aisha, the mother of the faithful
     believers to seek her help in her emancipation
     Aisha said to her, "If your masters agree, I will
     pay them your price in a lump sum and manumit
     you." Buraira mentioned that offer to her masters
     but they refused to sell her unless the Wala' was
     for them. 'Aisha told Allah's Apostle about it. He
     said, "Buy and manumit her as the Wala' is for
     the liberator." 


Volume 3, Book 46, Number 739: 

     Narrated 'Abdul Wahid bin Aiman: 

     I went to 'Aisha and said, "I was the slave of
     Utba bin Abu Lahab. "Utba died and his sons
     became my masters who sold me to Ibn Abu
     Amr who manumitted me. The sons of 'Utba
     stipulated that my Wala' should be for them."
     'Aisha said, "Buraira came to me and she was
     given the writing of emancipation by her masters
     and she asked me to buy and manumit her. I
     agreed to it, but Buraira told me that her masters
     would not sell her unless her Wala' was for
     them." 'Aisha said, "I am not in need of that."
     When the Prophet heard that, or he was told
     about it, he asked 'Aisha about it. 'Aisha
     mentioned what Buraira had told her. The
     Prophet said, "Buy and manumit her and let them
     stipulate whatever they like." So, 'Aisha bought
     and manumitted her and her masters stipulated
     that her Wala' should be for them." The Prophet;,
     said, "The Wala' will be for the liberator even if
     they stipulated a hundred conditions." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 47: 

                   Gifts 



Volume 3, Book 47, Number 740: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "O Muslim women! None of
     you should look down upon the gift sent by her
     she-neighbour even if it were the trotters of the
     sheep (fleshless part of legs)." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 741: 

     Narrated Urwa: 

     Aisha said to me, "O my nephew! We used to
     see the crescent, and then the crescent and then
     the crescent in this way we saw three crescents
     in two months and no fire (for cooking) used to
     be made in the houses of Allah's Apostle. I said,
     "O my aunt! Then what use to sustain you?"
     'Aisha said, "The two black things: dates and
     water, our neighbors from Ansar had some
     Manarh and they used to present Allah's Apostle
     some of their milk and he used to make us
     drink." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 742: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "I shall accept the invitation
     even if I were invited to a meal of a sheep's
     trotter, and I shall accept the gift even if it were
     an arm or a trotter of a sheep." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 743: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     The Prophet sent for a woman from the
     emigrants and she had a slave who was a
     carpenter. The Prophet said to her "Order your
     slave to prepare the wood (pieces) for the
     pulpit." So, she ordered her slave who went and
     cut the wood from the tamarisk and prepared the
     pulpit, for the Prophet. When he finished the
     pulpit, the woman informed the Prophet that it
     had been finished. The Prophet asked her to
     send that pulpit to him, so they brought it. The
     Prophet lifted it and placed it at the place in
     which you see now." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 744: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada Al-Aslami: 

     That his father said, "One day I was sitting with
     some of the Prophet's companions on the way to
     Mecca. Allah's Apostle was ahead of us. All of
     my companions were in the state of Ihram while I
     was a non-Muhrim. They saw an onager while I
     was busy repairing my shoes, so they did not tell
     me about it but they wished I had seen it. By
     chance I looked up and saw it. So, I turned to
     the horse, saddled it and rode on it, forgetting to
     take the spear and the whip. I asked them if they
     could hand over to me the whip and the spear
     but they said, 'No, by Allah, we shall not help
     you in that in any way.' I became angry and got
     down from the horse, picked up both the things
     and rode the horse again. I attacked the onager
     and slaughtered it, and brought it (after it had
     been dead). They took it (cooked some of it)
     and started eating it, but they doubted whether it
     was allowed for them to eat it or not, as they
     were in the state of Ihram. So, we proceeded
     and I hid with me one of its fore-legs. When we
     met Allah's Apostle and asked him about the
     case, he asked, 'Do you have a portion of it with
     you?' I replied in the affirmative and gave him
     that fleshy fore-leg which he ate completely while
     he was in the state of Ihram . 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 745: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Once Allah's Apostle visited us in this house of
     ours and asked for something to drink. We
     milked one of our sheep and mixed it with water
     from this well of ours and gave it to him. Abu
     Bakr was sitting on his left side and 'Umar in
     front of him and a bedouin on his right side.
     When Allah's Apostle finished, 'Umar said to
     Allah's Apostle "Here is Abu Bakr." But Allah's
     Apostle gave the remaining milk to the bedouin
     and said twice, "The (persons on the) right side!
     So, start from the right side." Anas added, "It is a
     Sunna (the Prophet's traditions)" and repeated it
     thrice. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 746: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     We chased a rabbit at Mar-al-Zahran and the
     people ran after it but were exhausted. I
     overpowered and caught it, and gave it to Abu
     Talha who slaughtered it and sent its hip or two
     thighs to Allah's Apostle. (The narrator confirms
     that he sent two thighs). The Prophet accepted
     that. (The sub-narrator asked Anas, "Did the
     Prophet; eat from it?" Anas replied, "He ate from
     it.") 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 747: 

     Narrated As-Sa'b bin Jaththama: 

     An onager was presented to Allah's Apostle at
     the place called Al-Abwa' or Waddan, but
     Allah's Apostle rejected it. When the Prophet
     noticed the signs of sorrow on the giver's face he
     said, "We have not rejected your gift, but we are
     in the state of Ihram." (i.e. if we were not in a
     state of Ihram we would have accepted your gift,
     Fateh-al-Bari page 130, Vol. 6) 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 748: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The people used to look forward for the days of
     my ('Aisha's) turn to send gifts to Allah's Apostle
     in order to please him. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 749: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     Ibn Abbas said: Um Hufaid, Ibn 'Abbas's aunt
     sent some dried yogurt (butter free), ghee
     (butter) and a mastigar to the Prophet as a gift.
     The Prophet ate the dried yogurt and butter but
     left the mastigar because he disliked it. Ibn
     'Abbas said, "The mastigar was eaten at the table
     of Allah's Apostle and if it had been illegal to eat,
     it could not have been eaten at the table of
     Allah's Apostle." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 750: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Whenever a meal was brought to Allah's
     Apostle, he would ask whether it was a gift or
     Sadaqa (something given in charity). If he was
     told that it was Sadaqa, he would tell his
     companions to eat it, but if it was a gift, he would
     hurry to share it with them. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 751: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Some meat was brought to the Prophet and it
     was said that the meat had been given in charity
     to Buraira. He said, "It was Sadaqa for Buraira
     but a gift for us." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 752: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I intended to buy Buraira but her masters
     stipulated that her Wala should be for them.
     When the Prophet was told about it, he said to
     me, "Buy and manumit her, as the Wala' is for the
     liberator." Once Buraira was given some meat,
     and the Prophet asked, "What is this?" I said, "It
     has been given to Buraira in charity." He said, "It
     is sadaqa for her but a gift for us." Buraira was
     given the option (to stay with her husband or to
     part with him). AbdurRahman (a sub-narrator)
     wondered, "Was her husband a slave or a free
     man?" Shu'ba (another sub-narrator) said, "I
     asked 'Abdur-Rahman whether her husband was
     a slave or a free man. He replied that he did not
     know whether he was a slave or a free man." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 753: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya: 

     Once the Prophet went to 'Aisha and asked her
     whether she had something (to eat). She said that
     she had nothing except the mutton which Um
     'Atiyya had sent to (Buraira) in charity. The
     Prophet said that it had reached its destination
     (i.e. it is no longer an object of charity.) 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 754: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The people used to send gifts to the Prophet on
     the day of my turn. Um Salama said: "My
     companions (the wives of the Prophet Other than
     Aisha) gathered and they complained about it.
     So I informed the Prophet about it on their
     behalf, but he remained silent. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 755: 

     Narrated 'Urwa from 'Aisha: 

     The wives of Allah's Apostle were in two groups.
     One group consisted of 'Aisha, Hafsa, Safiyya
     and Sauda; and the other group consisted of Um
     Salama and the other wives of Allah's Apostle.
     The Muslims knew that Allah's Apostle loved
     'Aisha, so if any of them had a gift and wished to
     give to Allah's Apostle, he would delay it, till
     Allah's Apostle had come to 'Aisha's home and
     then he would send his gift to Allah's Apostle in
     her home. The group of Um Salama discussed
     the matter together and decided that Um Salama
     should request Allah's Apostle to tell the people
     to send their gifts to him in whatever wife's house
     he was. Um Salama told Allah's Apostle of what
     they had said, but he did not reply. Then they
     (those wives) asked Um Salama about it. She
     said, "He did not say anything to me." They
     asked her to talk to him again. She talked to him
     again when she met him on her day, but he gave
     no reply. When they asked her, she replied that
     he had given no reply. They said to her, "Talk to
     him till he gives you a reply." When it was her
     turn, she talked to him again. He then said to her,
     "Do not hurt me regarding Aisha, as the Divine
     Inspirations do not come to me on any of the
     beds except that of Aisha." On that Um Salama
     said, "I repent to Allah for hurting you." Then the
     group of Um Salama called Fatima, the daughter
     of Allah's Apostle and sent her to Allah's Apostle
     to say to him, "Your wives request to treat them
     and the daughter of Abu Bakr on equal terms."
     Then Fatima conveyed the message to him. The
     Prophet said, "O my daughter! Don't you love
     whom I love?" She replied in the affirmative and
     returned and told them of the situation. They
     requested her to go to him again but she refused.
     They then sent Zainab bint Jahsh who went to
     him and used harsh words saying, "Your wives
     request you to treat them and the daughter of Ibn
     Abu Quhafa on equal terms." On that she raised
     her voice and abused 'Aisha to her face so much
     so that Allah's Apostle looked at 'Aisha to see
     whether she would retort. 'Aisha started replying
     to Zainab till she silenced her. The Prophet then
     looked at 'Aisha and said, "She is really the
     daughter of Abu Bakr." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 756: 

     Narrated 'Azra bin Thabit Al-Ansari: 

     When I went to Thumama bin 'Abdullah, he gave
     me some perfume and said that Anas would not
     reject the gifts of perfume. Anas said: The
     Prophet used not to reject the gifts of perfume. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 757: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and
     Marwan: 

     When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin came
     to the Prophet he stood up amongst the people,
     Glorified and Praised Allah as He deserved, and
     said, "Then after: Your brethren have come to
     you with repentance and I see it logical to return
     to them their captives; so whoever amongst you
     likes to do that as a favor, then he can do it, and
     whoever of you like to stick to his share till we
     give him his right from the very first Fai (war
     booty) (1) which Allah will bestow on us, then
     (he can do so)." The people replied, "We do that
     (to return the captives) willingly as a favor for
     your sake." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 758: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostles used to accept gifts and used to
     give something in return. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 759: 

     Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir: 

     that his father took him to Allah's Apostle and
     said, "I have given this son of mine a slave." The
     Prophet asked, "Have you given all your sons the
     like?" He replied in the negative. The Prophet
     said, "Take back your gift then." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 760: 

     Narrated 'Amir: 

     I heard An-Nu'man bin Bashir on the pulpit
     saying, "My father gave me a gift but 'Amra bint
     Rawaha (my mother) said that she would not
     agree to it unless he made Allah's Apostle as a
     witness to it. So, my father went to Allah's
     Apostle and said, 'I have given a gift to my son
     from 'Amra bint Rawaha, but she ordered me to
     make you as a witness to it, O Allah's Apostle!'
     Allah's Apostle asked, 'Have you given (the like
     of it) to everyone of your sons?' He replied in the
     negative. Allah's Apostle said, 'Be afraid of
     Allah, and be just to your children.' My father
     then returned and took back his gift." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 761: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhari: 

     Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah told me that 'Aisha had
     said, "When the Prophet became sick and his
     condition became serious, he requested his wives
     to allow him to be treated in my house, and they
     allowed him. He came out leaning on two men
     while his feet were dragging on the ground. He
     was walking between Al-'Abbas and another
     man." 'Ubaidullah said, "When I informed Ibn
     'Abbas of what 'Aisha had said, he asked me
     whether I knew who was the second man whom
     'Aisha had not named. I replied in the negative.
     He said, 'He was 'Ali bin Abi Talib." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 762: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: The Prophet said, "One
     who takes back his gift (which he has already
     given) is like a dog that swallows its vomit." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 763: 

     Narrated Asma: 

     Once I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have no
     property except what has been given to me by
     Az-Zubair (i.e. her husband). May I give in
     charity?" The Prophet said, "Give in charity and
     do not withhold it; otherwise Allah will withhold it
     back from you . " 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 764: 

     Narrated Asma: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Give (in charity) and do
     not give reluctantly lest Allah should give you in a
     limited amount; and do not withhold your money
     lest Allah should withhold it from you." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 765: 

     Narrated Kurib: 

     the freed slave of Ibn 'Abbas, that Maimuna bint
     Al-Harith told him that she manumitted a
     slave-girl without taking the permission of the
     Prophet. On the day when it was her turn to be
     with the Prophet, she said, "Do you know, O
     Allah's Apostle, that I have manumitted my
     slave-girl?" He said, "Have you really?" She
     replied in the affirmative. He said, "You would
     have got more reward if you had given her (i.e.
     the slave-girl) to one of your maternal uncles." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 766: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle wanted to go on a
     journey, he would draw lots as to which of his
     wives would accompany him. He would take her
     whose name came out. He used to fix for each of
     them a day and a night. But Sauda bint Zam'a
     gave up her (turn) day and night to 'Aisha, the
     wife of the Prophet in order to seek the pleasure
     of Allah's Apostle (by that action). 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 767: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have two neighbors;
     which of them should I give a gift to?" The
     Prophet said, "(Give) to the one whose door is
     nearer to you." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 768: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     That he heard As-Sa'b bin Jaththama Al-Laithi,
     who was one of the companions of the Prophet,
     saying that he gave the meat of an onager to
     Allah's Apostle while he was at a place called
     Al-Abwa' or Waddan, and was in a state of
     Ihram. The Prophet did not accept it. When the
     Prophet saw the signs of sorrow on As-Sa'b's
     face because of not accepting his present, he said
     (to him), "We are not returning your present, but
     we are in the state of Ihram." (See Hadith No.
     747) 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 769: 

     Narrated Abu Humaid Al-Sa'idi: 

     The Prophet appointed a man from the tribe of
     Al-Azd, called Ibn 'Utbiyya for collecting the
     Zakat. When he returned he said, "This (i.e. the
     Zakat) is for you and this has been given to my
     as a present." The Prophet said, "Why hadn't he
     stayed in his father's or mother's house to see
     whether he would be given presents or not? By
     Him in Whose Hands my life is, whoever takes
     something from the resources of the Zakat
     (unlawfully) will be carrying it on his neck on the
     Day of Resurrection; if it be a camel, it will be
     grunting; if a cow, it will be mooing; and if a
     sheep, it will be bleating." The Prophet then
     raised his hands till we saw the whiteness of his
     armpits, and he said thrice, "O Allah! Haven't I
     conveyed Your Message (to them)?" 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 770: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet said to me, "I will give you so much
     (the Prophet pointed thrice with his hands) when
     funds of Bahrain will come to me." But the
     Prophet died before the money reached him.
     (When it came) Abu Bakr ordered an announcer
     to announce that whoever had a money claim on
     the Prophet or was promised to be given
     something, should come to Abu Bakr. I went to
     Abu Bakr and told him that the Prophet had
     promised to give me so much. On that Abu Bakr
     gave me three handfuls (of money). 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 771: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama: 

     Allah's Apostle distributed some cloaks but did
     not give anything thereof to Makhrama.
     Makhrama said (to me), "O son! accompany me
     to Allah's Apostle." When I went with him, he
     said, "Call him to me." I called him (i.e. the
     Prophet ) for my father. He came out wearing
     one of those cloaks and said, "We kept this
     (cloak) for you, (Makhrama)." Makhrama
     looked at the cloak and said, "Makhrama is
     pleased," (or the Prophet said), "Is Makhrama
     pleased?" 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 772: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "I am
     ruined." The Prophet asked, "What do you
     mean?" He said, "I had a sexual intercourse with
     my wife during Ramadan (while fasting)." The
     Prophet asked him, "Can you manumit a slave?"
     He replied in the negative. He then asked him,
     "Can you fast for two successive months
     continuously" He replied in the negative. The
     Prophet then asked him, "Can you feed sixty
     poor persons?" He replied in the negative. In the
     meantime an Ansari came with a basket full of
     dates. The Prophet said to the man, "Take it and
     give it in charity (as an expiation of your sin)."
     The man said "Should I give it to some people
     who are poorer than we O Allah's Apostle? By
     Him Who has sent you with the Truth, there is no
     family between Medina's two mountains poorer
     than we." Allah's Apostle told him to take it and
     provide his family with it." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 773: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     My father was martyred on the day (of the
     battle) of Uhud and his creditors demanded the
     debt back in a harsh manner. So I went to
     Allah's Apostle and informed him of that, he
     asked them to accept the fruits of my garden and
     excuse my father, but they refused. So, Allah's
     Apostle did not give them the fruits, nor did he
     cut them and distribute them among them, but
     said, "I will come to you tomorrow morning." So,
     he came to us the next morning and walked
     about in between the date-palms and invoked
     Allah to bless their fruits. I plucked the fruits and
     gave back all the rights of the creditors in full,
     and a lot of fruits were left for us. Then I went to
     Allah's Apostle, who was sitting, and informed
     him about what happened. Allah's Apostle told
     'Umar, who was sitting there, to listen to the
     story. 'Umar said, "Don't we know that you are
     Allah's Apostle? By Allah! you are Allah's
     Apostle!" 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 774: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     A drink (milk mixed with water) was brought to
     the Prophet who drank some of it while a boy
     was sitting on his right and old men on his left.
     The Prophet said to the boy, "If you permit me,
     I'll give (the rest of the drink to) these old men
     first." The boy said, "I will not give preference to
     any one over me as regards my share from you,
     O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet then put that
     container in the boy's hand. (See Hadith No.
     541). 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 775: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     I sold a camel to the Prophet on one of the
     journeys. When we reached Medina, he ordered
     me to go to the Mosque and offer two Rakat.
     Then he weighed for me (the price of the camel
     in gold) and gave an extra amount over it. A part
     of it remained with me till it was taken by the
     army of Sham on the day of Harra." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 776: 

     Narrated Shal bin Sad: 

     A drink (of milk and water) was brought to
     Allah's Apostle while a boy was sitting on his
     right side and old men were sitting on his left
     side. He asked the boy, "Will you allow me to
     give it to these (people)?" The boy said, "No, by
     Allah, I will not allow anyone to take my right
     from you." Then the Prophet put the bowl in the
     boy's hand. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 777: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle owed a man some debt (and that
     man demanded it very harshly). The companions
     of the Prophet wanted to harm him, but the
     Prophet said to them, "Leave him, as the creditor
     has the right to speak harshly." He then added,
     "Buy (a camel) of the same age and give it to
     him." They said, "We cannot get except a camel
     of an older age than that of his." He said, "Buy it
     and give it to him, as the best amongst you is he
     who pays back his debt in the most handsome
     way.' 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 778: 

     Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam and Al-Miswar
     bin Makhrama: 

     When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin came
     to the Prophet they requested him to return their
     property and their captives. He said to them,
     "This concerns also other people along with me
     as you see, and the best statement to me is the
     true one, so you may choose one of two
     alternatives; either the captives or the property
     and (I have not distributed the booty for) I have
     been waiting for you." 

     When the Prophet had returned from Ta'if, he
     waited for them for more than ten nights. When
     they came to know that the Prophet would not
     return except one of the two, they chose their
     captives. The Prophet then stood up amongst the
     Muslims, Glorified and Praised Allah as He
     deserved, and then said, "Then after: These
     brothers of yours have come to you with
     repentance and I see it proper to return their
     captives, so whoever amongst you likes to do
     that as a favor, then he can do it, and whoever of
     you wants to stick to his share till we pay him
     from the very first Fai (i.e. war booty) which
     Allah will give us, then he can do so." The people
     said, "We return (the captives) to them willingly
     as a favor, O Allah's Apostle!" The Prophet said,
     "I do not know who of you has given his consent
     and who has not; so go back and your leaders
     may present your decision to me." The people
     went away, and their leaders discussed the
     matter with them, and then came to the Prophet
     to tell him that all of them had given their consent
     (to return the captives) willingly. (Az-Zuhn, the
     sub-narrator said, "This is what we know about
     the captives, of Hawazin.") 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 779: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: That the people sitting with
     that person will be his co-owners. But this report
     is not confirmed by an authentic narration. (Refer
     to Hadith 778) 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 780: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet took a camel of special age from
     somebody on credit. Its owner came and
     demanded it back (harshly). The Prophet said,
     "No doubt, he who has a right, can demand it."
     Then the Prophet gave him an older camel than
     his camel and said, "The best amongst you is he
     who repays his debts in the most handsome
     way." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 781: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     That he was in the company of the Prophet on a
     journey, riding a troublesome camel belonging to
     'Umar. The camel used to go ahead of the
     Prophet, so Ibn 'Umar's father would say, "O
     'Abdullah! No one should go ahead of the
     Prophet." The Prophet said to him, "Sell it to
     me." 'Umar said to the Prophet "It is for you."
     So, he bought it and said, "O 'Abdullah! It is for
     you, and you can do with it what you like." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 782: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Umar bin Al-Khattab saw a silken dress (cloak)
     being sold at the gate of the Mosque and said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! Would that you buy it and
     wear it on Fridays and when the delegates come
     to you!" Allah's Apostle said, "This is worn by
     the one who will have no share in the Hereafter."
     Later on some silk dresses were brought and
     Allah's Apostle sent one of them to 'Umar. 'Umar
     said, "How do you give me this to wear while
     you said what you said about the dress of
     'Utarid?" Allah's Apostle said, "I have not given it
     to you to wear." So, 'Umar gave it to a pagan
     brother of his in Mecca. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 783: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Once the Prophet went to the house of Fatima
     but did not enter it. 'Ali came and she told him
     about that. When 'All asked the Prophet about it,
     he said, "I saw a (multi-colored) decorated
     curtain on her door. I am not interested in
     worldly things." 'Ali went to Fatima and told her
     about it. Fatima said, "I am ready to dispense
     with it in the way he suggests." The Prophet
     ordered her to send it to such-and-such needy
     people. " 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 784: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     The Prophet gave me a silken dress as a gift and
     I wore it. When I saw the signs of anger on his
     face, I cut it into pieces and distributed it among
     my wives." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 785: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     A Jubba (i.e. cloak) made of thick silken cloth
     was presented to the Prophet. The Prophet used
     to forbid people to wear silk. So, the people
     were pleased to see it. The Prophet said, "By
     Him in Whose Hands Muhammad's soul is, the
     handkerchiefs of Sad bin Mu'adh in Paradise are
     better than this." Anas added, "The present was
     sent to the Prophet by Ukaidir (a Christian) from
     Dauma." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 786: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     A Jewess brought a poisoned (cooked) sheep
     for the Prophet who ate from it. She was brought
     to the Prophet and he was asked, "Shall we kill
     her?" He said, "No." I continued to see the effect
     of the poison on the palate of the mouth of
     Allah's Apostle . 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 787: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr: 

     We were one-hundred and thirty persons
     accompanying the Prophet who asked us
     whether anyone of us had food. There was a
     man who had about a Sa of wheat which was
     mixed with water then. A very tall pagan came
     driving sheep. The Prophet asked him, "Will you
     sell us (a sheep) or give it as a present?" He said,
     "I will sell you (a sheep)." The Prophet bought a
     sheep and it was slaughtered. The Prophet
     ordered that its liver and other abdominal organs
     be roasted. By Allah, the Prophet gave every
     person of the one-hundred-and-thirty a piece of
     that; he gave all those of them who were present;
     and kept the shares of those who were
     absent.The Prophet then put its meat in two huge
     basins and all of them ate to their fill, and even
     then more food was left in the two basins which
     were carried on the camel (or said something like
     it). 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 788: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Umar saw a silken cloak over a man for sale and
     requested the Prophet to buy it in order to wear
     it on Fridays and while meeting delegates. The
     Prophet said, "This is worn by the one who will
     have no share in the Hereafter." Later on Allah's
     Apostle got some silken cloaks similar to that
     one, and he sent one to 'Umar. 'Umar said to the
     Prophet "How can I wear it, while you said
     about it what you said?" The Prophet said, "I
     have not given it to you to wear, but to sell or to
     give to someone else." So, 'Umar sent it to his
     brother at Mecca before he embraced Islam. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 789: 

     Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr: 

     My mother came to me during the lifetime of
     Allah's Apostle and she was a pagan. I said to
     Allah's Apostle (seeking his verdict), "My mother
     has come to me and she desires to receive a
     reward from me, shall I keep good relations with
     her?" The Prophet said, "Yes, keep good relation
     with her. " 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 790: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "He who takes back his
     present is like him who swallows his vomit." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 791: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "The bad example is not for
     us. He who takes back his present is like a dog
     that swallows back its vomit." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 792: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     I gave a horse in Allah's Cause. The person to
     whom it was given, did not look after it. I
     intended to buy it from him, thinking that he
     would sell it cheap. When I asked the Prophet he
     said, "Don't buy it, even if he gives it to you for
     one Dirham, as the person who takes back what
     he has given in charity, is like a dog that swallows
     back its vomit." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 793: 

     Narrated Jabir: The Prophet gave the verdict that
     'Umra is for the one to whom it is presented. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 794: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Umra is permissible." Ata
     said, "Jabir narrated the same to me from the
     Prophet." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 795: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Once the people of Medina were frightened, so
     the Prophet borrowed a horse from Abu Talha
     called Al-Mandub, and rode it. When he came
     back he said, "We have not seen anything (to be
     afraid of), but the horse was very fast (having an
     energy as inexhaustible as the water of the sea)." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 796: 

     Narrated Aiman: 

     I went to 'Aisha and she was wearing a coarse
     dress costing five Dirhams. 'Aisha said, "Look up
     and see my slave-girl who refuses to wear it in
     the house though during the lifetime of Allah's
     Apostle I had a similar dress which no woman
     desiring to appear elegant (before her husband)
     failed to borrow from me." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 797: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "What a good Maniha (the
     she-camel which has recently given birth and
     which gives profuse milk) is, and (what a good
     Maniha) (the sheep which gives profuse milk, a
     bowl in the morning and another in the evening)
     is!" 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 798: 

     Narrated Malik: 

     Maniha is a good deed of charity. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 799: 

     Narrated Ibn Shihab Az-Zuhri: 

     Anas bin Malik said, "When the emigrants came
     Medina, they had nothing whereas the Ansar had
     land and property. The Ansar gave them their
     land on condition that the emigrants would give
     them half the yearly yield and work on the land
     and provide the necessaries for cultivation." His
     (i.e. Anas's mother who was also the mother of
     'Abdullah bin Abu Talha, gave some date-palms
     to Allah' Apostle who gave them to his freed
     slave-girl (Um Aiman) who was also the mother
     of Usama bin Zaid. When the Prophet finished
     from the fighting against the people of Khaibar
     and returned to Medina, the emigrants returned
     to the Ansar the fruit gifts which the Ansar had
     given them. The Prophet also returned to Anas's
     mother the date-pallms. Allah's Apostle gave Um
     Aiman other trees from his garden in lieu of the
     old gift. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 800: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     That Allah's Apostle said, "There are forty
     virtuous deeds and the best of them is the
     Maniha of a she-goat, and anyone who does one
     of these virtuous deeds hoping for Allah's reward
     with firm confidence that he will get it, then Allah
     will make him enter Paradise because of Hassan
     (a sub-narrator) said, "We tried to count those
     good deeds below the Maniha; we mentioned
     replying to the sneezer, removing harmful things
     from the road, etc., but we failed to count even
     fifteen." 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 801: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Some men had superfluous land and they said
     that they would give it to others to cultivate on
     the condition that they would get one-third or
     one-fourth or one half of its yield. The Prophet
     said, "Whoever has land should cultivate it
     himself or give it to his brother or keep it
     uncultivated." 

     Narrated Abu Said: A bedouin came to the
     Prophet and asked him about emigration. The
     Prophet said to him, "May Allah be merciful to
     you. The matter of emigration is difficult. Have
     you got some camels?" He replied in the
     affirmative. The Prophet asked him, "Do you pay
     their Zakat?" He replied in the affirmative. He
     asked, "Do you lend them so that their milk may
     be utilized by others?" The bedouin said, "Yes."
     The Prophet asked, "Do you milk them on the
     day off watering them?" He replied, "Yes." The
     Prophet said, "Do good deeds beyond the
     merchants (or the sea) and Allah will never
     disregard any of your deeds." (See Hadith No.
     260, Vol. 5) 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 802: 

     Narrated Tawus: 

     That he was told by the most learned one
     amongst them (i.e. Ibn Abbas) that the Prophet
     went towards some land which was flourishing
     with vegetation and asked to whom it belonged.
     He was told that such and such a person took it
     on rent. The Prophet said, "It would have been
     better (for the owner) if he had given it to him
     gratis rather than charging him a fixed rent. 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 803: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The Prophet Abraham
     migrated with Sarah. The people (of the town
     where they migrated) gave her Ajar (i.e. Hajar).
     Sarah returned and said to Abraham, "Do you
     know that Allah has humiliated that pagan and he
     has given a slave-girl for my service?" 


Volume 3, Book 47, Number 804: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khatab: 

     Once I gave a horse (for riding) in Allah's Cause.
     Later I saw it being sold. I asked Allah's Apostle
     (whether I could buy it). He said, "Don't buy it,
     for you should not get back what you have given
     in charity." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 48: 

               Witnesses 



Volume 3, Book 48, Number 805: 

     Narrated Urwa bin Al-Musayyab, Alqama bin
     Waqqas and Ubaidullah bin Abdullah: 

     About the story of 'Aisha and their narrations
     were similar attesting each other, when the liars
     said what they invented about 'Aisha, and the
     Divine Inspiration was delayed, Allah's Apostle
     sent for 'Ali and Usama to consult them in
     divorcing his wife (i.e. 'Aisha). Usama said,
     "Keep your wife, as we know nothing about her
     except good." Buraira said, "I cannot accuse her
     of any defect except that she is still a young girl
     who sleeps, neglecting her family's dough which
     the domestic goats come to eat (i.e. she was too
     simpleminded to deceive her husband)." Allah's
     Apostle said, "Who can help me to take revenge
     over the man who has harmed me by defaming
     the reputation of my family? By Allah, I have not
     known about my family-anything except good,
     and they mentioned (i.e. accused) a man about
     whom I did not know anything except good." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 806: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle and Ubai bin Kab Al-Ansari
     went to the garden where Ibn Saiyad used to
     live. When Allah's Apostle entered (the garden),
     he (i.e. Allah's Apostle ) started hiding himself
     behind the datepalms as he wanted to hear
     secretly the talk of Ibn Saiyad before the latter
     saw him. Ibn Saiyad wrapped with a soft
     decorated sheet was lying on his bed murmuring.
     Ibn Saiyad's mother saw the Prophet hiding
     behind the stems of the date-palms. She
     addressed Ibn Saiyad saying, "O Saf, this is
     Muhammad." Hearing that Ibn Saiyad stopped
     murmuring (or got cautious), the Prophet said, "If
     she had left him undisturbed, he would have
     revealed his reality." (See Hadith No. 290, Vol 4
     for details) 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 807: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The wife of Rifa'a Al-Qurazi came to the Prophet
     and said, "I was Rifa'a's wife, but he divorced me
     and it was a final irrevocable divorce. Then I
     married AbdurRahman bin Az-Zubair but he is
     impotent." The Prophet asked her 'Do you want
     to remarry Rifa'a? You cannot unless you had a
     complete sexual relation with your present
     husband." Abu Bakr was sitting with Allah's
     Apostle and Khalid bin Said bin Al-'As was at
     the door waiting to be admitted. He said, "O
     Abu Bakr! Do you hear what this (woman) is
     revealing frankly before the Prophet ?" 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 808: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Abu Mulaika from 'Uqba
     bin Al-Harith: 

     Uqba married the daughter of Abu Ihab bin Aziz,
     and then a woman came and said, "I suckled
     'Uqba and his wife." 'Uqba said to her, "I do not
     know that you have suckled me, and you did not
     inform me." He then sent someone to the house
     of Abu Ihab to enquire about that but they did
     not know that she had suckled their daughter.
     Then 'Uqba went to the Prophet in Medina and
     asked him about it. The Prophet said to him,
     "How (can you keep your wife) after it has been
     said (that both of you were suckled by the same
     woman)?" So, he divorced her and she was
     married to another (husband). 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 809: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     People were (sometimes) judged by the revealing
     of a Divine Inspiration during the lifetime of
     Allah's Apostle but now there is no longer any
     more (new revelation). Now we judge you by
     the deeds you practice publicly, so we will trust
     and favor the one who does good deeds in front
     of us, and we will not call him to account about
     what he is really doing in secret, for Allah will
     judge him for that; but we will not trust or believe
     the one who presents to us with an evil deed
     even if he claims that his intentions were good. 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 810: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     A funeral procession passed in front of the
     Prophet and the people praised the deceased.
     The Prophet said, "It has been affirmed
     (Paradise)." Then another funeral procession
     passed by and the people talked badly of the
     deceased. The Prophet said, "It has been
     affirmed (Hell)." Allah's Apostle was asked, "O
     Allah's Apostle! You said it has been affirmed for
     both?" The Prophet said, "The testimony of the
     people (is accepted), (for) the believer are
     Allah's witnesses on the earth." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 811: 

     Narrated Abu Al-Aswad: 

     Once I went to Medina where there was an
     outbreak of disease and the people were dying
     rapidly. I was sitting with 'Umar and a funeral
     procession passed by. The people praised the
     deceased. 'Umar said, "It has been affirmed"
     (Paradise). Then another funeral procession
     passed by. The people praised the deceased.
     'Umar said, "It has been affirmed." (Paradise).
     Then another funeral procession passed by. The
     people praised the deceased. 'Umar said, "It has
     been affirmed (Paradise)." Then a third funeral
     procession passed by and the people talked
     badly of the deceased. 'Umar said, "It has been
     affirmed (Hell)." I asked Umar, "O chief of the
     believers! What has been affirmed?" He said, "I
     have said what the Prophet said. He said, 'Allah
     will admit into paradise any Muslim whose good
     character is attested by four persons.' We asked
     the Prophet, 'If there were three witnesses only?'
     He said, 'Even three.' We asked, 'If there were
     two only?' He said, 'Even two.' But we did not
     ask him about one witness." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 812: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Aflah asked the permission to visit me but I did
     not allow him. He said, "Do you veil yourself
     before me although I am your uncle?" 'Aisha
     said, "How is that?" Aflah replied, "You were
     suckled by my brother's wife with my brother's
     milk." I asked Allah's Apostle about it, and he
     said, "Allah is right, so permit him to visit you." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 813: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said about Hamza's daughter, "I am
     not legally permitted to marry her, as foster
     relations are treated like blood relations (in
     marital affairs). She is the daughter of my foster
     brother." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 814: 

     Narrated Amra bint 'Abdur-Rahman: 

     That 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet told her uncle
     that once, while the Prophet was in her house,
     she heard a man asking Hafsa's permission to
     enter her house. 'Aisha said, "I said, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! I think the man is Hafsa's foster uncle.' "
     'Aisha added, "O Allah's Apostle! There is a man
     asking the permission to enter your house."
     Allah's Apostle replied, "I think the man is
     Hafsa's foster uncle." 'Aisha said, "If so-and-so
     were living (i.e. her foster uncle) would he be
     allowed to visit me?" Allah's Apostle said, "Yes,
     he would, as the foster relations are treated like
     blood relations (in marital affairs)." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 815: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Once the Prophet came to me while a man was
     in my house. He said, "O 'Aisha! Who is this
     (man)?" I replied, "My foster brothers" He said,
     "O 'Aisha! Be sure about your foster brothers, as
     fostership is only valid if it takes place in the
     suckling period (before two years of age)." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 816: 

     Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 

     A woman committed theft in the Ghazwa of the
     Conquest (of Mecca) and she was taken to the
     Prophet who ordered her hand to be cut off.
     'Aisha said, "Her repentance was perfect and she
     was married (later) and used to come to me
     (after that) and I would present her needs to
     Allah's Apostle." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 817: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid: 

     Allah's Apostle ordered that an unmarried man
     who committed illegal sexual intercourse be
     scourged one hundred lashes and sent into exile
     for one year. 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 818: 

     Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir: 

     My mother asked my father to present me a gift
     from his property; and he gave it to me after
     some hesitation. My mother said that she would
     not be satisfied unless the Prophet was made a
     witness to it. I being a young boy, my father held
     me by the hand and took me to the Prophet . He
     said to the Prophet, "His mother, bint Rawaha,
     requested me to give this boy a gift." The
     Prophet said, "Do you have other sons besides
     him?" He said, "Yes." The Prophet said, "Do not
     make me a witness for injustice." Narrated
     Ash-Shabi that the Prophet said, "I will not
     become a witness for injustice." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 819: 

     Narrated Zahdam bin Mudrab: 

     I heard Imran bin Husain saying, "The Prophet
     said, 'The best people are those living in my
     generation, then those coming after them, and
     then those coming after (the second generation)."
     Imran said "I do not know whether the Prophet
     mentioned two or three generations after your
     present generation. The Prophet added, 'There
     will be some people after you, who will be
     dishonest and will not be trustworthy and will
     give witness (evidences) without being asked to
     give witness, and will vow but will not fulfill their
     vows, and fatness will appear among them." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 820: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "The people of my generation
     are the best, then those who follow them, and
     then whose who follow the latter. After that there
     will come some people whose witness will go
     ahead of their oaths, and their oaths will go
     ahead of their witness." Ibrahim (a sub-narrator)
     said, "We used to be beaten for taking oaths by
     saying, 'I bear witness by the Name of Allah or
     by the Covenant of Allah." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 821: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet was asked about the great sins He
     said, "They are:-- 

     (1 ) To join others in worship with Allah, 

     (2) To be undutiful to one's parents. 

     (3) To kill a person (which Allah has forbidden
     to kill) (i.e. to commit the crime of murdering). 

     (4) And to give a false witness." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 822: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     The Prophet said thrice, "Should I inform you out
     the greatest of the great sins?" They said, "Yes,
     O Allah's Apostle!" He said, "To join others in
     worship with Allah and to be undutiful to one's
     parents." The Prophet then sat up after he had
     been reclining (on a pillow) and said, "And I
     warn you against giving a false witness, and he
     kept on saying that warning till we thought he
     would not stop. (See Hadith No. 7, Vol. 8) 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 823: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet heard a man (reciting Quran) in the
     Mosque, and he said, "May Allah bestow His
     Mercy upon him. No doubt, he made me
     remember such-and such Verses of
     such-and-such Sura which I dropped (from my
     memory). 

     Narrated Aisha: The Prophet performed the
     Tahajjud prayer in my house, and then he heard
     the voice of 'Abbas who was praying in the
     Mosque, and said, "O 'Aisha! Is this 'Abbad's
     voice?" I said, "Yes." He said, "O Allah! Be
     merciful to 'Abbas!" 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 824: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "Bilal pronounces the Adhan
     when it is still night (before dawn), so eat and
     drink till the next Adhan is pronounced (or till
     you hear Ibn Um Maktum's Adhan)." Ibn Um
     Maktum was a blind man who would not
     pronounce the Adhan till he was told that it was
     dawn. 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 825: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama: 

     Some outer garments were received the Prophet
     and my father (Makhrama) said to me, "Let us
     go to the Prophet so that he may give us
     something from the garments." So, my father
     stood at the door and spoke. The Prophet
     recognized his voice and came out carrying a
     garment and telling Makhrama the good qualities
     of that garment, adding, "I have kept this for you,
     I have sent this for you." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 826: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet said, "Isn't the witness of a woman
     equal to half of that of a man?" The women said,
     "Yes." He said, "This is because of the deficiency
     of a woman's mind." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 827: 

     Narrated Uqba bin Al-Harith: 

     That he had married Um Yahya bint Abu Ihab.
     He said. "A black slave-lady came and said, 'I
     suckled you both.' I then mentioned that to the
     Prophet who turned his face aside." Uqba further
     said, "I went to the other side and told the
     Prophet about it. He said, 'How can you (keep
     her as your wife) when the lady has said that she
     suckled both of you (i.e. you and your wife?)"
     So, the Prophet ordered him to divorce her. 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 828: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith: 

     I married a woman and later on a woman came
     and said, "I suckled you both." So, I went to the
     Prophet (to ask him about it). He said, "How can
     you (keep her as a wife) when it has been said
     (that you were foster brother and sister)? Leave
     (divorce) her. 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 829: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) "Whenever Allah's
     Apostle intended to go on a journey, he would
     draw lots amongst his wives and would take with
     him the one upon whom the lot fell. During a
     Ghazwa of his, he drew lots amongst us and the
     lot fell upon me, and I proceeded with him after
     Allah had decreed the use of the veil by women.
     I was carried in a Howdah (on the camel) and
     dismounted while still in it. When Allah's Apostle
     was through with his Ghazwa and returned home,
     and we approached the city of Medina, Allah's
     Apostle ordered us to proceed at night. When
     the order of setting off was given, I walked till I
     was past the army to answer the call of nature.
     After finishing I returned (to the camp) to depart
     (with the others) and suddenly realized that my
     necklace over my chest was missing. So, I
     returned to look for it and was delayed because
     of that. The people who used to carry me on the
     camel, came to my Howdah and put it on the
     back of the camel, thinking that I was in it, as, at
     that time, women were light in weight, and thin
     and lean, and did not use to eat much. So, those
     people did not feel the difference in the heaviness
     of the Howdah while lifting it, and they put it over
     the camel. At that time I was a young lady. They
     set the camel moving and proceeded on. I found
     my necklace after the army had gone, and came
     to their camp to find nobody. So, I went to the
     place where I used to stay, thinking that they
     would discover my absence and come back in
     my search. While in that state, I felt sleepy and
     slept. 

     Safwan bin Mu'attal As-Sulami Adh-Dhakwani
     was behind the army and reached my abode in
     the morning. When he saw a sleeping person, he
     came to me, and he used to see me before
     veiling. So, I got up when I heard him saying,
     "Inna lil-lah-wa inn a ilaihi rajiun (We are for
     Allah, and we will return to Him)." He made his
     camel knell down. He got down from his camel,
     and put his leg on the front legs of the camel and
     then I rode and sat over it. Safwan set out
     walking, leading the camel by the rope till we
     reached the army who had halted to take rest at
     midday. Then whoever was meant for
     destruction, fell into destruction, (some people
     accused me falsely) and the leader of the false
     accusers was 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul. After
     that we returned to Medina, and I became ill for
     one month while the people were spreading the
     forged statements of the false accusers. I was
     feeling during my ailment as if I were not
     receiving the usual kindness from the Prophet
     which I used to receive from him when I got sick.
     But he would come, greet and say, 'How is that
     (girl)?' I did not know anything of what was
     going on till I recovered from my ailment and
     went out with Um Mistah to the Manasi where
     we used to answer the call of nature, and we
     used not to go to answer the call of nature except
     from night to night and that was before we had
     lavatories near to our houses. And this habit of
     ours was similar to the habit of the old 'Arabs in
     the open country (or away from houses). So. I
     and Um Mistah bint Ruhm went out walking. Um
     Mistah stumbled because of her long dress and
     on that she said, 'Let Mistah be ruined.' I said,
     'You are saying a bad word. Why are you
     abusing a man who took part in (the battle of)
     Badr?' She said, 'O Hanata (you there) didn't
     you hear what they said?' Then she told me the
     rumors of the false accusers. 

     My sickness was aggravated, and when I
     returned home, Allah's Apostle came to me, and
     after greeting he said, 'How is that (girl)?' I
     requested him to allow me to go to my parents. I
     wanted then to be sure of the news through them
     I Allah's Apostle allowed me, and I went to my
     parents and asked my mother, 'What are the
     people talking about?' She said, 'O my daughter!
     Don't worry much about this matter. By Allah,
     never is there a charming woman loved by her
     husband who has other wives, but the women
     would forge false news about her.' I said,
     'Glorified be Allah! Are the people really taking
     of this matter?' That night I kept on weeping and
     could not sleep till morning. In the morning
     Allah's Apostle called Ali bin Abu Talib and
     Usama bin Zaid when he saw the Divine
     Inspiration delayed, to consul them about
     divorcing his wife (i.e. 'Aisha). Usama bin Zaid
     said what he knew of the good reputation of his
     wives and added, 'O Allah's Apostle! Keep you
     wife, for, by Allah, we know nothing about her
     but good.' 'Ali bin Abu Talib said, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! Allah has no imposed restrictions on
     you, and there are many women other than she,
     yet you may ask the woman-servant who will tell
     you the truth.' On that Allah's Apostle called
     Buraira and said, 'O Burair. Did you ever see
     anything which roused your suspicions about
     her?' Buraira said, 'No, by Allah Who has sent
     you with the Truth, I have never seen in her
     anything faulty except that she is a girl of
     immature age, who sometimes sleeps and leaves
     the dough for the goats to eat.' On that day
     Allah's Apostle ascended the pulpit and
     requested that somebody support him in
     punishing 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul. Allah's
     Apostle said, 'Who will support me to punish that
     person ('Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul) who has
     hurt me by slandering the reputation of my
     family? By Allah, I know nothing about my family
     but good, and they have accused a person about
     whom I know nothing except good, and he never
     entered my house except in my company.' 

     Sad bin Mu'adh got up and said, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! by Allah, I will relieve you from him. If
     that man is from the tribe of the Aus, then we will
     chop his head off, and if he is from our brothers,
     the Khazraj, then order us, and we will fulfill your
     order.' On that Sad bin 'Ubada, the chief of the
     Khazraj and before this incident, he had been a
     pious man, got up, motivated by his zeal for his
     tribe and said, 'By Allah, you have told a lie; you
     cannot kill him, and you will never be able to kill
     him.' On that Usaid bin Al-Hadir got up and said
     (to Sad bin 'Ubada), 'By Allah! you are a liar. By
     Allah, we will kill him; and you are a hypocrite,
     defending the hypocrites.' On this the two tribes
     of Aus and Khazraj got excited and were about
     to fight each other, while Allah's Apostle was
     standing on the pulpit. He got down and
     quietened them till they became silent and he
     kept quiet. On that day I kept on weeping so
     much so that neither did my tears stop, nor could
     I sleep. 

     In the morning my parents were with me and I
     had wept for two nights and a day, till I thought
     my liver would burst from weeping. While they
     were sitting with me and I was weeping, an
     Ansari woman asked my permission to enter,
     and I allowed her to come in. She sat down and
     started weeping with me. While we were in this
     state, Allah's Apostle came and sat down and he
     had never sat with me since the day they forged
     the accusation. No revelation regarding my case
     came to him for a month. He recited Tashah-hud
     (i.e. None has the right to be worshipped but
     Allah and Muhammad is His Apostle) and then
     said, 'O 'Aisha! I have been informed
     such-and-such about you; if you are innocent,
     then Allah will soon reveal your innocence, and if
     you have committed a sin, then repent to Allah
     and ask Him to forgive you, for when a person
     confesses his sin and asks Allah for forgiveness,
     Allah accepts his repentance.' When Allah's
     Apostle finished his speech my tears ceased
     completely and there remained not even a single
     drop of it. I requested my father to reply to
     Allah's Apostle on my behalf. My father said, By
     Allah, I do not know what to say to Allah's
     Apostle.' I said to my mother, 'Talk to Allah's
     Apostle on my behalf.' She said, 'By Allah, I do
     not know what to say to Allah's Apostle. 

     I was a young girl and did not have much
     knowledge of the Quran. I said. 'I know, by
     Allah, that you have listened to what people are
     saying and that has been planted in your minds
     and you have taken it as a truth. Now, if I told
     you that I am innocent and Allah knows that I am
     innocent, you would not believe me and if I
     confessed to you falsely that I am guilty, and
     Allah knows that I am innocent you would
     believe me. By Allah, I don't compare my
     situation with you except to the situation of
     Joseph's father (i.e. Jacob) who said, 'So (for
     me) patience is most fitting against that which you
     assert and it is Allah (Alone) whose help can be
     sought.' Then I turned to the other side of my
     bed hoping that Allah would prove my
     innocence. By Allah I never thought that Allah
     would reveal Divine Inspiration in my case, as I
     considered myself too inferior to be talked of in
     the Holy Qur'an. I had hoped that Allah's
     Apostle might have a dream in which Allah
     would prove my innocence. By Allah, Allah's
     Apostle had not got up and nobody had left the
     house before the Divine Inspiration came to
     Allah's Apostle. So, there overtook him the same
     state which used to overtake him, (when he used
     to have, on being inspired divinely). He was
     sweating so much so that the drops of the sweat
     were dropping like pearls though it was a (cold)
     wintry day. When that state of Allah's Apostle
     was over, he was smiling and the first word he
     said, 'Aisha! Thank Allah, for Allah has declared
     your innocence.' My mother told me to go to
     Allah's Apostle . I replied, 'By Allah I will not go
     to him and will not thank but Allah.' So Allah
     revealed: "Verily! They who spread the slander
     are a gang among you . . ." (24.11) 

     When Allah gave the declaration of my
     Innocence, Abu Bakr, who used to provide for
     Mistah bin Uthatha for he was his relative, said,
     'By Allah, I will never provide Mistah with
     anything because of what he said about Aisha.'
     But Allah later revealed: -- 

     "And let not those who are good and wealthy
     among you swear not to help their kinsmen,
     those in need and those who left their homes in
     Allah's Cause. Let them forgive and overlook.
     Do you not wish that Allah should forgive you?
     Verily! Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful."
     (24.22) After that Abu Bakr said, 'Yes ! By
     Allah! I like that Allah should forgive me,' and
     resumed helping Mistah whom he used to help
     before. 

     Allah's Apostle also asked Zainab bint Jahsh (i.e.
     the Prophet's wife about me saying, 'What do
     you know and what did you see?' She replied,
     'O Allah's Apostle! I refrain to claim hearing or
     seeing what I have not heard or seen. By Allah, I
     know nothing except goodness about Aisha."
     Aisha further added "Zainab was competing with
     me (in her beauty and the Prophet's love), yet
     Allah protected her (from being malicious), for
     she had piety." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 830: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     A man praised another man in front of the
     Prophet . The Prophet said to him, "Woe to you,
     you have cut off your companion's neck, you
     have cut off your companion's neck," repeating it
     several times and then added, "Whoever
     amongst you has to praise his brother should say,
     'I think that he is so and so, and Allah knows
     exactly the truth, and I do not confirm anybody's
     good conduct before Allah, but I think him so
     and so,' if he really knows what he says about
     him." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 831: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari: 

     The Prophet heard someone praising another and
     exaggerating in his praise. The Prophet said,
     "You have ruined or cut the man's back (by
     praising him so much). 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 832: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle called me to present myself in
     front of him or the eve of the battle of Uhud,
     while I was fourteen years of age at that time,
     and he did not allow me to take part in that
     battle, but he called me in front of him on the eve
     of the battle of the Trench when I was fifteen
     years old, and he allowed me (to join the battle)."
     Nafi' said, "I went to 'Umar bin 'Abdul Aziz who
     was Caliph at that time and related the above
     narration to him, He said, "This age (fifteen) is the
     limit between childhood and manhood," and
     wrote to his governors to give salaries to those
     who reached the age of fifteen. 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 833: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet said, "Bath on Friday is compulsory
     for those who have attained the age of puberty." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 834: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If somebody takes a false
     oath in order to get the property of a Muslim
     (unjustly) by that oath, then Allah will be angry
     with him when he will meet Him." Al-Ash'ath
     informed me, "By Allah! This was said regarding
     me. There was a dispute about a piece of land
     between me and a man from the Jews who
     denied my right. I took him to the Prophet.
     Allah's Apostle asked me, 'Do you have an
     evidence?' I replied in the negative. He said to
     the Jew, 'Take an oath.' I said, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! He will surely take an oath and take my
     property unjustly." So, Allah revealed: "Verily!
     Those who purchase a little gain at the cost of
     Allah's covenant and their oaths . . . " (3.77) 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 835: 

     Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika: 

     Ibn 'Abbas wrote that the Prophet gave his
     verdict on the basis of the defendant's oath. 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 836: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) said, "Whoever takes a
     (false) oath in order to grab some property
     (unjustly), Allah will be angry with him when he
     will meet Him. Allah confirmed that through His
     Divine Revelation: "Verily! Those who purchase
     a little gain at the cost of Allah's covenant and
     their oaths . . . they will have a painful
     punishment." (3.77) 

     Al-Ash'ath bin Qais came to us and asked,
     'What is Abu Abdur-Rahman (i.e. 'Abdullah)
     telling you? 'We told him what he was narrating
     to us. He said, 'He was telling the truth; this
     Divine Verse was revealed in connection with
     me. There was a dispute between me and
     another man about something and the case was
     filed before Allah's Apostle who said, 'Produce
     your two witnesses or else the defendant is to
     take an oath.' I said, The defendant will surely
     take a (false) oath caring for nothing.' The
     Prophet said, 'Whoever takes a false oath in
     order to grab (other's) property, then Allah will
     be angry with him when he will meet Him.' Then
     Allah revealed its confirmation. Al-Ashath then
     recited the above Divine Verse." (3.77) 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 837: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Hilal bin Umaiya accused his wife before the
     Prophet of committing illegal sexual intercourse
     with Sharik bin Sahma.' The Prophet said,
     "Produce a proof, or else you would get the legal
     punishment (by being lashed) on your back."
     Hilal said, "O Allah's Apostle! If anyone of us
     saw another man over his wife, would he go to
     search for a proof." The Prophet went on saying,
     "Produce a proof or else you would get the legal
     punishment (by being lashed) on your back." The
     Prophet then mentioned the narration of Lian (as
     in the Holy Book). (Surat-al-Nur: 24) 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 838: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said,
     "There are three persons whom Allah will neither
     talk to nor look at, nor purify from (the sins), and
     they will have a painful punishment. (They are): 

     (1) A man possessed superfluous water on a
     way and he withheld it from the travelers. 

     (2) a man who gives a pledge of allegiance to a
     Muslim ruler and gives it only for worldly gains. If
     the ruler gives him what he wants, he remains
     obedient to It, otherwise he does not abide by it,
     and 

     (3) a man bargains with another man after the
     Asr prayer and the latter takes a false oath in the
     Name of Allah) claiming that he has been offered
     so much for the thing and the former (believes
     him and) buys it." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 839: 

     Narrated Ibn Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever takes a (false) oath
     in order to grab (others) property, then Allah will
     be angry with him when he will meet Him." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 840: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet asked some people to take an oath,
     and they hurried for it. The Prophet ordered that
     lots should be drawn amongst them as to who
     would take an oath first. 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 841: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa: 

     A man displayed some goods in the market and
     took a false oath that he had been offered so
     much for them though he was not offered that
     amount Then the following Divine Verse was
     revealed:-- "Verily! Those who purchase a little
     gain at the cost of Allah's covenant and their
     oaths . . . Will get painful punishment." (3.77) Ibn
     Abu Aufa added, "Such person as described
     above is a treacherous Riba-eater (i.e. eater of
     usury). 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 842: 

     Narrated Abu Wail from Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever takes a false oath in
     order to grab another man's (or his brother's)
     property, then Allah will be angry with him when
     he will meet him." Then Allah confirmed this by
     revealing the Divine Verse: "Verily! Those who
     purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's
     Covenant and their oaths . . . Will get painful
     punishment." (3.77) Al-Ash'ath met me and
     asked, "What did 'Abdullah tell you today?" I
     said, "So and so." He said, "The Verse was
     revealed regarding my case." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 843: 

     Narrated Talha bin 'Ubaidullah: 

     A man came to Allah's Apostle asking him about
     Islam, Allah's Apostle said, "You have to offer
     five compulsory prayers in a day and a night (24
     hours)." The man asked, "Is there any more
     compulsory prayers for me?" Allah's Apostle
     said, "No, unless you like to offer Nawafil (i.e.
     optional prayers)." Allah's Apostle then added,
     "You have to observe fasts during the month of
     Ramadan." The man said, "Am I to fast any other
     days?' Allah's Apostle said, "No, unless you wish
     to observe the optional fast voluntarily." Then
     Allah's Apostle told him about the compulsory
     Zakat. The man asked, "Do I have to give
     anything besides?" Allah's Apostle said, "No,
     unless you wish to give in charity voluntarily." So,
     the man departed saying, "By Allah I will neither
     do more nor less than that." Allah's Apostle said,
     "If he has said the truth he will be successful." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 844: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever has to take an oath
     should swear by Allah or remain silent." (i.e. He
     should not swear by other than Allah.) 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 845: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     Once Allah's Apostle said, "You people present
     your cases to me and some of you may be more
     eloquent and persuasive in presenting their
     argument. So, if I give some one's right to
     another (wrongly) because of the latter's (tricky)
     presentation of the case, I am really giving him a
     piece of fire; so he should not take it." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 846: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Abbas: 

     Abu Sufyan told me that Heraclius said to him,
     "When I enquired you what he (i.e. Muhammad)
     ordered you, you replied that he ordered you to
     establish the prayer, to speak the truth, to be
     chaste, to keep promises and to pay back
     trusts." Then Heraclius added, "These are really
     the qualities of a prophet." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 847: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The signs of a hypocrite
     are three: 

     (1) whenever he speaks, he tells a lie, 

     (2) whenever he is entrusted, he proves to be
     dishonest, 

     (3) whenever he promises, he breaks his
     promise. 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 848: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Ali: 

     Jabir bin Abdullah said, "When the Prophet died,
     Abu Bakr received some property from Al-Ala
     bin Al-Hadrami. Abu Bakr said to the people,
     "Whoever has a money claim on the Prophet, or
     was promised something by him, should come to
     us (so that we may pay him his right)." Jabir
     added, "I said (to Abu Bakr), Allah's Apostle
     promised me that he would give me this much,
     and this much, and this much (spreading his
     hands three times)." Jabir added, "Abu Bakr
     counted for me and handed me five-hundred
     (gold pieces), and then five-hundred, and then
     five-hundred." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 849: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     A Jew from Hira asked me which one of the two
     periods Musa (i.e. Prophet Moses) completed. I
     said, "I don't know, (but wait) till I see the most
     learned 'Arab and enquire him about it." So, I
     went to Ibn 'Abbas and asked him. He replied,
     "Moses completed the longer and better period."
     Ibn 'Abbas added, "No doubt, an apostle of
     Allah always does what he says." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 850: 

     Narrated Ubaidullah bin Abdullah bin Utba: 

     Ibn Abbas said, "O Muslims? How do you ask
     the people of the Scriptures, though your Book
     (i.e. the Quran) which was revealed to His
     Prophet is the most recent information from Allah
     and you recite it, the Book that has not been
     distorted? Allah has revealed to you that the
     people of the scriptures have changed with their
     own hands what was revealed to them and they
     have said (as regards their changed Scriptures):
     This is from Allah, in order to get some worldly
     benefit thereby." Ibn Abbas added: "Isn't the
     knowledge revealed to you sufficient to prevent
     you from asking them? By Allah I have never
     seen any one of them asking (Muslims) about
     what has been revealed to you." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 851: 

     Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir: 

     The Prophet said, "The example of the person
     abiding by Allah's orders and limits (or the one
     who abides by the limits and regulations
     prescribed by Allah) in comparison to the one
     who do wrong and violate Allah's limits and
     orders is like the example of people drawing lots
     for seats in a boat. Some of them got seats in the
     upper part while the others in the lower part ;
     those in the, lower part have to pass by those in
     the upper one to get water, and that troubled the
     latter. One of them (i.e. the people in the lower
     part) took an axe and started making a hole in
     the bottom of the boat. The people of the upper
     part came and asked him, (saying), 'What is
     wrong with you?' He replied, "You have been
     troubled much by my (coming up to you), and I
     have to get water.' Now if they prevent him from
     doing that they will save him and themselves, but
     if they leave him (to do what he wants), they will
     destroy him and themselves." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 852: 

     Narrated Um Al-Ala: 

     That when the Ansar drew lots as to which of the
     emigrants should dwell with which of the Ansar,
     the name of Uthman bin Mazun came out (to be
     in their lot). Um Al-Ala further said, "Uthman
     stayed with us, and we nursed him when he got
     sick, but he died. We shrouded him in his
     clothes, and Allah's Apostle came to our house
     and I said, (addressing the dead 'Uthman), 'O
     Abu As-Sa'ib! May Allah be merciful to you. I
     testify that Allah has blessed you.' The Prophet
     said to me, "How do you know that Allah has
     blessed him?" I replied, 'I do not know O Allah's
     Apostle! May my parents be sacrificed for you.'
     Allah's Apostle said, 'As regards Uthman, by
     Allah he has died and I really wish him every
     good, yet, by Allah, although I am Allah's
     Apostle, I do not know what will be done to
     him.' Um Al-Ala added, 'By Allah I shall never
     attest the piety of anybody after him. And what
     Allah's Apostles said made me sad." Um Al-Ala
     further said, "Once I slept and saw in a dream, a
     flowing stream for Uthman. So I went to Allah's
     Apostle and told him about it, he said, 'That is
     (the symbol of) his deeds." 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 853: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to go on a
     journey, he used to draw lots among his wives
     and would take with him the one on whom the lot
     fell. He also used to fix for everyone of his wives
     a day and a night, but Sauda bint Zam'a gave her
     day and night to 'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet
     intending thereby to please Allah's Apostle. 


Volume 3, Book 48, Number 854: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If the people knew what is
     the reward of making the call (for the prayer) and
     (of being in) the first row (in the prayer), and if
     they found no other way to get this privilege
     except by casting lots, they would certainly cast
     lots for it. If they knew the reward of the noon
     prayer, they would race for it, and if they knew
     the reward of the morning (i.e. Fajr) and Isha
     prayers, they would present themselves for the
     prayer even if they had to crawl to reach there. 


 Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 49: 

            Peacemaking 



Volume 3, Book 49, Number 855: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     There was a dispute amongst the people of the
     tribe of Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf. The Prophet went to
     them along with some of his companions in order
     to make peace between them. The time for the
     prayer became due but the Prophet did not turn
     up; Bilal pronounced the Adhan (i.e. call) for the
     prayer but the Prophet did not turn up, so Bilal
     went to Abu Bakr and said, "The time for the
     prayer is due and the Prophet i detained, would
     you lead the people in the prayer?" Abu Bakr
     replied, "Yes, you wish." So, Bilal pronounced
     the Iqama of the prayer and Abu Bakr went
     ahead (to lead the prayer), but the Prophet came
     walking among the rows till he joined the first
     row. The people started clapping and they
     clapped too much, and Abu Bakr used not to
     look hither and thither in the prayer, but he
     turned round and saw the Prophet standing
     behind him. The Prophet beckoned him with his
     hand to keep on praying where he was. Abu
     Bakr raised his hand and praised Allah and then
     retreated till he came in the (first) row, and the
     Prophet went ahead and lead the people in the
     prayer. When the Prophet finished the prayer, he
     turned towards the people and said, "O people!
     When something happens to you during the
     prayer, you start clapping. Really clapping is
     (permissible) for women only. If something
     happens to one of you in his prayer, he should
     say: 'Subhan Allah', (Glorified be Allah), for
     whoever hears him (saying so) will direct his
     attention towards him. O Abu Bakr! What
     prevented you from leading the people in the
     prayer when I beckoned to you (to continue)?"
     Abu Bakr replied, "It did not befit the son of Abu
     Quhafa to lead the prayer in front of the Prophet.


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 856: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     It was said to the Prophet "Would that you see
     Abdullah bin Ubai." So, the Prophet went to him,
     riding a donkey, and the Muslims accompanied
     him, walking on salty barren land. When the
     Prophet reached 'Abdullah bin Ubai, the latter
     said, "Keep away from me! By Allah, the bad
     smell of your donkey has harmed me." On that
     an Ansari man said (to 'Abdullah), "By Allah!
     The smell of the donkey of Allah's Apostle is
     better than your smell." On that a man from
     'Abdullah's tribe got angry for 'Abdullah's sake,
     and the two men abused each other which
     caused the friends of the two men to get angry,
     and the two groups started fighting with sticks,
     shoes and hands. We were informed that the
     following Divine Verse was revealed (in this
     concern):-- "And if two groups of Believers fall
     to fighting then, make peace between them."
     (49.9) 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 857: 

     Narrated Um Kulthum bint Uqba: 

     That she heard Allah's Apostle saying, "He who
     makes peace between the people by inventing
     good information or saying good things, is not a
     liar." 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 858: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     Once the people of Quba fought with each other
     till they threw stones on each other. When Allah's
     Apostle was informed about it, he said, "Let us
     go to bring about a reconciliation between them."


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 859: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The following Verse: If a woman fears cruelty or
     desertion on her husband's part (i.e. the husband
     notices something unpleasant about his wife, such
     as old age or the like, and wants to divorce her,
     but she asks him to keep her and provide for her
     as he wishes). (4.128) "There is no blame on
     them if they reconcile on such basis." 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 860: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid
     Al-Juhani: 

     A bedouin came and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     Judge between us according to Allah's Laws."
     His opponent got up and said, "He is right. Judge
     between us according to Allah's Laws." The
     bedouin said, "My son was a laborer working for
     this man, and he committed illegal sexual
     intercourse with his wife. The people told me that
     my son should be stoned to death; so, in lieu of
     that, I paid a ransom of one hundred sheep and a
     slave girl to save my son. Then I asked the
     learned scholars who said, "Your son has to be
     lashed one-hundred lashes and has to be exiled
     for one year." The Prophet said, "No doubt I will
     judge between you according to Allah's Laws.
     The slave-girl and the sheep are to go back to
     you, and your son will get a hundred lashes and
     one year exile." He then addressed somebody,
     "O Unais! go to the wife of this (man) and stone
     her to death" So, Unais went and stoned her to
     death. 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 861: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If somebody innovates
     something which is not in harmony with the
     principles of our religion, that thing is rejected." 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 862: 

     Narrated Al-Bara bin 'Azib: 

     When Allah's Apostle concluded a peace treaty
     with the people of Hudaibiya, Ali bin Abu Talib
     wrote the document and he mentioned in it,
     "Muhammad, Allah's Apostle ." The pagans said,
     "Don't write: 'Muhammad, Allah's Apostle', for if
     you were an apostle we would not fight with
     you." Allah's Apostle asked Ali to rub it out, but
     Ali said, "I will not be the person to rub it out."
     Allah's Apostle rubbed it out and made peace
     with them on the condition that the Prophet and
     his companions would enter Mecca and stay
     there for three days, and that they would enter
     with their weapons in cases. 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 863: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     When the Prophet intended to perform 'Umra in
     the month of Dhul-Qada, the people of Mecca
     did not let him enter Mecca till he settled the
     matter with them by promising to stay in it for
     three days only. When the document of treaty
     was written, the following was mentioned: 'These
     are the terms on which Muhammad, Allah's
     Apostle agreed (to make peace).' They said,
     "We will not agree to this, for if we believed that
     you are Allah's Apostle we would not prevent
     you, but you are Muhammad bin 'Abdullah." The
     Prophet said, "I am Allah's Apostle and also
     Muhammad bin 'Abdullah." Then he said to 'Ali,
     "Rub off (the words) 'Allah's Apostle' ", but 'Ali
     said, "No, by Allah, I will never rub off your
     name." So, Allah's Apostle took the document
     and wrote, 'This is what Muhammad bin
     'Abdullah has agreed upon: No arms will be
     brought into Mecca except in their cases, and
     nobody from the people of Mecca will be
     allowed to go with him (i.e. the Prophet ) even if
     he wished to follow him and he (the Prophet )
     will not prevent any of his companions from
     staying in Mecca if the latter wants to stay.'
     When the Prophet entered Mecca and the time
     limit passed, the Meccans went to 'Ali and said,
     "Tell your Friend (i.e. the Prophet ) to go out, as
     the period (agreed to) has passed." So, the
     Prophet went out of Mecca. The daughter of
     Hamza ran after them (i.e. the Prophet and his
     companions), calling, "O Uncle! O Uncle!" 'Ali
     received her and led her by the hand and said to
     Fatima, "Take your uncle's daughter." Zaid and
     Ja'far quarrel ed about her. 'Ali said, "I have
     more right to her as she is my uncle's daughter."
     Ja'far said, "She is my uncle's daughter, and her
     aunt is my wife." Zaid said, "She is my brother's
     daughter." The Prophet judged that she should
     be given to her aunt, and said that the aunt was
     like the mother. He then said to 'All, "You are
     from me and I am from you", and said to Ja'far,
     "You resemble me both in character and
     appearance", and said to Zaid, "You are our
     brother (in faith) and our freed slave." 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 864: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle set out for the 'Umra but the
     pagans of Quraish prevented him from reaching
     the Ka'ba. So, he slaughtered his sacrifice and
     got his head shaved at Al-Hudaibiya, and agreed
     with them that he would perform 'Umra the
     following year and would not carry weapons
     except swords and would not stay in Mecca
     except for the period they al lowed. So, the
     Prophet performed the 'Umra in the following
     year and entered Mecca according to the treaty,
     and when he stayed for three days, the pagans
     ordered him to depart, and he departed. 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 865: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Abu Hathma: 

     Abdullah bin Sahl and Muhaiyisa bin Mas'ud bin
     Zaid went to Khaibar when it had a peace treaty
     (with the Muslims). 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 866: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Ar-Rabi, the daughter of An-Nadr broke the
     tooth of a girl, and the relatives of Ar-Rabi'
     requested the girl's relatives to accept the Irsh
     (compensation for wounds etc.) and forgive (the
     offender), but they refused. So, they went to the
     Prophet who ordered them to bring about
     retaliation. Anas bin An-Nadr asked, "O Allah";
     Apostle! Will the tooth of Ar-Rabi' be broken?
     No, by Him Who has sent you with the Truth,
     her tooth will not be broken." The Prophet said,
     "O Anas! Allah"; law ordains retaliation." Later
     the relatives of the girl agreed and forgave her.
     The Prophet said, "There are some of Allah's
     slaves who, if they take an oath by Allah, are
     responded to by Allah i.e. their oath is fulfilled).
     Anas added, "The people agreed and accepted
     the Irsh." 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 867: 

     Narrated Al-Hasan Al-Basri: 

     By Allah, Al-Hasan bin Ali led large battalions
     like mountains against Muawiya. Amr bin Al-As
     said (to Muawiya), "I surely see battalions which
     will not turn back before killing their opponents."
     Muawiya who was really the best of the two men
     said to him, "O 'Amr! If these killed those and
     those killed these, who would be left with me for
     the jobs of the public, who would be left with me
     for their women, who would be left with me for
     their children?" Then Muawiya sent two Quraishi
     men from the tribe of 'Abd-i-Shams called
     'Abdur Rahman bin Sumura and Abdullah bin
     'Amir bin Kuraiz to Al-Hasan saying to them,
     "Go to this man (i.e. Al-Hasan) and negotiate
     peace with him and talk and appeal to him." So,
     they went to Al-Hasan and talked and appealed
     to him to accept peace. Al-Hasan said, "We, the
     offspring of 'Abdul Muttalib, have got wealth and
     people have indulged in killing and corruption
     (and money only will appease them)." They said
     to Al-Hasan, "Muawiya offers you so and so,
     and appeals to you and entreats you to accept
     peace." Al-Hasan said to them, "But who will be
     responsible for what you have said?" They said,
     "We will be responsible for it." So, what-ever
     Al-Hasan asked they said, "We will be
     responsible for it for you." So, Al-Hasan
     concluded a peace treaty with Muawiya.
     Al-Hasan (Al-Basri) said: I heard Abu Bakr
     saying, "I saw Allah's Apostle on the pulpit and
     Al-Hasan bin 'Ali was by his side. The Prophet
     was looking once at the people and once at
     Al-Hasan bin 'Ali saying, 'This son of mine is a
     Saiyid (i.e. a noble) and may Allah make peace
     between two big groups of Muslims through
     him." 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 868: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Once Allah's Apostle heard the loud voices of
     some opponents quarreling at the door. One of
     them was appealing to the other to deduct his
     debt and asking him to be lenient but the other
     was saying, "By Allah I will not do so." Allah's
     Apostle went out to them and said, "Who is the
     one who was swearing by Allah that he would
     not do a favor?" That man said, "I am that
     person, O Allah's Apostle! I will give my
     opponent whatever he wishes." 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 869: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Kab bin Malik from Kab
     bin Malik: 

     Abdullah bin Abu Hadrad Al-Aslami owed Kab
     bin Malik some money. One day the latter met
     the former and demanded his right, and their
     voices grew very loud. The Prophet passed by
     them and said, "O Ka'b," beckoning with his
     hand as if intending to say, "Deduct half the
     debts." So, Kab took half what the other owed
     him and remitted the other half. 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 870: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There is a Sadaqa to be
     given for every joint of the human body; and for
     every day on which the sun rises there is a
     reward of a Sadaqa (i.e. charitable gift) for the
     one who establishes justice among people." 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 871: 

     Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 

     Az-Zubair told me that he quarrelled with an
     Ansari man who had participated in (the battle
     of) Badr in front of Allah's Apostle about a water
     stream which both of them used for irrigation.
     Allah's Apostle said to Az-Zubair, "O Zubair!
     Irrigate (your garden) first, and then let the water
     flow to your neighbor." The Ansari became angry
     and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Is it because he is
     your cousin?" On that the complexion of Allah's
     Apostle changed (because of anger) and said (to
     Az-Zubair), "I irrigate (your garden) and then
     with-hold the water till it reaches the walls
     (surrounding the palms)." So, Allah's Apostle
     gave Az-Zubair his full right. Before that Allah's
     Apostle had given a generous judgment beneficial
     for Az-Zubair and the Ansari, but when the
     Ansan irritated Allah's Apostle he gave
     Az-Zubair his full right according to the evident
     law. Az-Zubair said, "By Allah ! I think the
     following Verse was revealed concerning that
     case: "But no by your Lord They can have No
     faith Until they make you judge In all disputes
     between them." (4.65) 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 872: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     My father died and was in debt. I suggested that
     his creditors take the fruits (i.e. dates) of my
     garden in lieu of the debt of my father, but they
     refused the offer, as they thought that it would
     not cover the full debt. So, I went to the Prophet
     and told him about it. He said (to me), "When
     you pluck the dates and collect them in the
     Mirbad (i.e. a place where dates are dried), call
     me (Allah's Apostle)." Finally he came
     accompanied by Abu Bakr and 'Umar and sat on
     the dates and invoked Allah to bless them. Then
     he said, "Call your creditors and give them their
     full rights." So, I paid all my father's creditors in
     full and yet thirteen extra Wasqs of dates
     remained, seven of which were 'Ajwa and six
     were Laun or six of which were Ajwa and seven
     were Laun. I met Allah's Apostle at sunset and
     informed him about it. On that he smiled and
     said, "Go to Abu Bakr and 'Umar and tell them
     about it." They said, "We perceived that was
     going to happen, as Allah's Apostle did what he
     did." 


Volume 3, Book 49, Number 873: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Kab: 

     That Ka'b bin Malik told him that in the lifetime
     of Allah's Apostle he demanded his debt from
     Ibn Abu Hadrad in the Mosque. Their voices
     grew louder till Allah's Apostle heard them while
     he was in his house. So he lifted the curtain of his
     room and called Ka'b bin Malik saying, "O
     Ka'b!" He replied, "Labbaik! O Allah's Apostle!"
     He beckoned to him with his hand suggesting that
     he deduct half the debt. Ka'b said, "I agree, O
     Allah's Apostle!" Allah's Apostle then said (to
     Ibn Abu Hadrad), "Get up and pay him the rest."


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 50: 

               Conditions 



Volume 3, Book 50, Number 874: 

     Narrated Marwan and al-Miswar bin
     Makhrama: 

     (from the companions of Allah's Apostle) When
     Suhail bin Amr agreed to the Treaty (of
     Hudaibiya), one of the things he stipulated then,
     was that the Prophet should return to them (i.e.
     the pagans) anyone coming to him from their
     side, even if he was a Muslim; and would not
     interfere between them and that person. The
     Muslims did not like this condition and got
     disgusted with it. Suhail did not agree except with
     that condition. So, the Prophet agreed to that
     condition and returned Abu Jandal to his father
     Suhail bin 'Amr. Thenceforward the Prophet
     returned everyone in that period (of truce) even if
     he was a Muslim. During that period some
     believing women emigrants including Um
     Kalthum bint Uqba bin Abu Muait who came to
     Allah's Apostle and she was a young lady then.
     Her relative came to the Prophet and asked him
     to return her, but the Prophet did not return her
     to them for Allah had revealed the following
     Verse regarding women: 

     "O you who believe! When the believing women
     come to you as emigrants. Examine them, Allah
     knows best as to their belief, then if you know
     them for true believers, Send them not back to
     the unbelievers, (for) they are not lawful (wives)
     for the disbelievers, Nor are the unbelievers
     lawful (husbands) for them (60.10) 

     Narrated 'Urwa: Aisha told me, "Allah's Apostle
     used to examine them according to this Verse:
     "O you who believe! When the believing women
     come to you, as emigrants test them . . . for Allah
     is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful." (60.10-12)
     Aisha said, "When any of them agreed to that
     condition Allah's Apostle would say to her, 'I
     have accepted your pledge of allegiance.' He
     would only say that, but, by Allah he never
     touched the hand of any women (i.e. never
     shook hands with them) while taking the pledge
     of allegiance and he never took their pledge of
     allegiance except by his words (only)." 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 875: 

     Narrated Jarir: 

     When I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's
     Apostle and he stipulated that I should give good
     advice to every Muslim. 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 876: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle
     for offering the prayers perfectly paying the
     Zakat and giving good advice to every Muslim. 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 877: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If someone sells pollinated
     date-palms, their fruits will be for the seller,
     unless the buyer stipulates the contrary." 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 878: 

     Narrated Urwa: 

     Aisha told me that Buraira came to seek her help
     in writing for emancipation and at that time she
     had not paid any part of her price. 'Aisha said to
     her, "Go to your masters and if they agree that I
     will pay your price (and free you) on condition
     that your Wala' will be for me, I will pay the
     money." Buraira told her masters about that, but
     they refused, and said, "If 'Aisha wants to do a
     favor she could, but your Wala will be for us."
     Aisha informed Allah's Apostle of that and he
     said to her, "Buy and manumit Buraira as the
     Wala' will go to the manumitted." 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 879: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     While I was riding a (slow) and tired camel, the
     Prophet passed by and beat it and prayed for
     Allah's Blessings for it. The camel became so fast
     as it had never been before. The Prophet then
     said, "Sell it to me for one Uqiyya (of gold)." I
     said, "No." He again said, "Sell it to me for one
     Uqiyya (of gold)." I sold it and stipulated that I
     should ride it to my house. When we reached
     (Medina) I took that camel to the Prophet and he
     gave me its price. I returned home but he sent for
     me (and when I went to him) he said, "I will not
     take your camel. Take your camel as a gift for
     you." (Various narrations are mentioned here
     with slight variations in expressions relating the
     condition that Jabir had the right to ride the sold
     camel up to Medina). 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 880: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Ansar said to the Prophet, "Divide our
     date-palms between us and our emigrant
     brothers." The Prophet said, "No." The Ansar
     said to the emigrants, "You may do the labor (in
     our gardens) and we will share the fruits with
     you." The emigrants said, "We hear and obey." 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 881: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle gave the land of Khaibar to the
     Jews on the condition that they would work on it
     and cultivate it and they would get half of its
     yield. 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 882: 

     Narrated Uqba bin Amir: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "From among all the
     conditions which you have to fulfill, the conditions
     which make it legal for you to have sexual
     relations (i.e. the marriage contract) have the
     greatest right to be fulfilled." 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 883: 

     Narrated Rafi bin Khadij: 

     We used to work on the fields more than the
     other Ansar, and we used to rent the land (for
     the yield of a specific portion of it). But
     sometimes that portion or the rest of the land did
     not give any yield, so we were forbidden (by the
     Prophet ) to follow such a system, but we were
     allowed to rent the land for money. 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 884: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "No town-dweller should sell
     for a bedouin. Do not practice Najsh (i.e. Do not
     offer a high price for a thing which you do not
     want to buy, in order to deceive the people). No
     Muslim should offer more for a thing already
     bought by his Muslim brother, nor should he
     demand the hand of a girl already engaged to
     another Muslim. A Muslim woman shall not try
     to bring about The divorce of her sister (i.e.
     another Muslim woman) in order to take her
     place herself." 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 885: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid
     Al-Juhani: 

     A bedouin came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O
     Allah's apostle! I ask you by Allah to judge My
     case according to Allah's Laws." His opponent,
     who was more learned than he, said, "Yes, judge
     between us according to Allah's Laws, and allow
     me to speak." Allah's Apostle said, "Speak." He
     (i .e. the bedouin or the other man) said, "My son
     was working as a laborer for this (man) and he
     committed illegal sexual intercourse with his wife.
     The people told me that it was obligatory that my
     son should be stoned to death, so in lieu of that I
     ransomed my son by paying one hundred sheep
     and a slave girl. Then I asked the religious
     scholars about it, and they informed me that my
     son must be lashed one hundred lashes, and be
     exiled for one year, and the wife of this (man)
     must be stoned to death." Allah's Apostle said,
     "By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, I will judge
     between you according to Allah's Laws. The
     slave-girl and the sheep are to be returned to
     you, your son is to receive a hundred lashes and
     be exiled for one year. You, Unais, go to the
     wife of this (man) and if she confesses her guilt,
     stone her to death." Unais went to that woman
     next morning and she confessed. Allah's Apostle
     ordered that she be stoned to death. 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 886: 

     Narrated Aiman Al-Makki: 

     rs had stipulated that her Wala would be for
     them.' The Prophet said, 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 887: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade (1) the meeting of the
     caravan (of goods) on the way, (2) and that a
     residing person buys for a bedouin, (3) and that a
     woman stipulates the divorce of the wife of the
     would-be husband, (4) and that a man tries to
     cause the cancellation of a bargain concluded by
     another. He also forbade An-Najsh (see Hadith
     824) and that one withholds the milk in the udder
     of the animal so that he may deceive people on
     selling it. 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 888: 

     Narrated Ubai bin Kab: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Moses the Apostle of
     Allah," and then he narrated the whole story
     about him. Al-Khadir said to Moses, "Did not I
     tell you that you can have no patience with me."
     (18.72). Moses then violated the agreement for
     the first time because of forgetfulness, then
     Moses promised that if he asked Al-Khadir
     about anything, the latter would have the right to
     desert him. Moses abided by that condition and
     on the third occasion he intentionally asked
     Al-Khadir and caused that condition to be
     applied. The three occasions referred to above
     are referred to by the following Verses: 

     "Call me not to account for forgetting And be not
     hard upon me." (18.73) 

     "Then they met a boy and Khadir killed him."
     (18.74) 

     "Then they proceeded and found a wall which
     was on the verge of falling and Khadir set it up
     straight." (18.77) 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 889: 

     Narrated Urwa: 

     Aisha said, "Buraira came to me and said, 'My
     people (masters) have written the contract for my
     emancipation for nine Awaq ) of gold) to be paid
     in yearly installments, one Uqiyya per year; so
     help me." Aisha said (to her), "If your masters
     agree, I will pay them the whole sum provided
     the Wala will be for me." Buraira went to her
     masters and told them about it, but they refused
     the offer and she returned from them while
     Allah's Apostles was sitting. She said, "I
     presented the offer to them, but they refused
     unless the Wala' would be for them." When the
     Prophet heard that and 'Aisha told him about It,
     he said to her, "Buy Buraira and let them stipulate
     that her Wala' will be for them, as the Wala' is
     for the manumitted." 'Aisha did so. After that
     Allah's Apostle got up amidst the people,
     Glorified and Praised Allah and said, "What is
     wrong with some people who stipulate things
     which are not in Allah's Laws? Any condition
     which is not in Allah's Laws is invalid even if
     there were a hundred such conditions. Allah's
     Rules are the most valid and Allah's Conditions
     are the most solid. The Wala is for the
     manumitted." 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 890: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     When the people of Khaibar dislocated Abdullah
     bin Umar's hands and feet, Umar got up
     delivering a sermon saying, "No doubt, Allah's
     Apostle made a contract with the Jews
     concerning their properties, and said to them,
     'We allow you (to stand in your land) as long as
     Allah allows you.' Now Abdullah bin Umar went
     to his land and was attacked at night, and his
     hands and feet were dislocated, and as we have
     no enemies there except those Jews, they are our
     enemies and the only people whom we suspect, I
     have made up my mind to exile them." When
     Umar decided to carry out his decision, a son of
     Abu Al-Haqiq's came and addressed 'Umar, "O
     chief of the believers, will you exile us although
     Muhammad allowed us to stay at our places, and
     made a contract with us about our properties,
     and accepted the condition of our residence in
     our land?" 'Umar said, "Do you think that I have
     forgotten the statement of Allah's Apostle, i.e.:
     What will your condition be when you are
     expelled from Khaibar and your camel will be
     carrying you night after night?" The Jew replied,
     "That was joke from Abu-l-Qasim." 'Umar said,
     "O the enemy of Allah! You are telling a lie."
     'Umar then drove them out and paid them the
     price of their properties in the form of fruits,
     money, camel saddles and ropes, etc." 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 891: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and
     Marwan: 

     (whose narrations attest each other) Allah's
     Apostle set out at the time of Al-Hudaibiya
     (treaty), and when they proceeded for a
     distance, he said, "Khalid bin Al-Walid leading
     the cavalry of Quraish constituting the front of the
     army, is at a place called Al-Ghamim, so take the
     way on the right." By Allah, Khalid did not
     perceive the arrival of the Muslims till the dust
     arising from the march of the Muslim army
     reached him, and then he turned back hurriedly
     to inform Quraish. The Prophet went on
     advancing till he reached the Thaniyya (i.e. a
     mountainous way) through which one would go
     to them (i.e. people of Quraish). The she-camel
     of the Prophet sat down. The people tried their
     best to cause the she-camel to get up but in vain,
     so they said, "Al-Qaswa' (i.e. the she-camel's
     name) has become stubborn! Al-Qaswa' has
     become stubborn!" The Prophet said,
     "Al-Qaswa' has not become stubborn, for
     stubbornness is not her habit, but she was
     stopped by Him Who stopped the elephant."
     Then he said, "By the Name of Him in Whose
     Hands my soul is, if they (i.e. the Quraish infidels)
     ask me anything which will respect the
     ordinances of Allah, I will grant it to them." 

     The Prophet then rebuked the she-camel and she
     got up. The Prophet changed his way till he
     dismounted at the farthest end of Al-Hudaibiya at
     a pit (i.e. well) containing a little water which the
     people used in small amounts, and in a short
     while the people used up all its water and
     complained to Allah's Apostle; of thirst. The
     Prophet took an arrow out of his arrow-case and
     ordered them to put the arrow in that pit. By
     Allah, the water started and continued sprouting
     out till all the people quenched their thirst and
     returned with satisfaction. While they were still in
     that state, Budail bin Warqa-al-Khuza'i came
     with some persons from his tribe Khuza'a and
     they were the advisers of Allah's Apostle who
     would keep no secret from him and were from
     the people of Tihama. Budail said, "I left Kab bin
     Luai and 'Amir bin Luai residing at the profuse
     water of Al-Hudaibiya and they had milch camels
     (or their women and children) with them, and will
     wage war against you, and will prevent you from
     visiting the Kaba." Allah's Apostle said, "We
     have not come to fight anyone, but to perform
     the 'Umra. No doubt, the war has weakened
     Quraish and they have suffered great losses, so if
     they wish, I will conclude a truce with them,
     during which they should refrain from interfering
     between me and the people (i.e. the 'Arab
     infidels other than Quraish), and if I have victory
     over those infidels, Quraish will have the option
     to embrace Islam as the other people do, if they
     wish; they will at least get strong enough to fight.
     But if they do not accept the truce, by Allah in
     Whose Hands my life is, I will fight with them
     defending my Cause till I get killed, but (I am
     sure) Allah will definitely make His Cause
     victorious." Budail said, "I will inform them of
     what you have said." So, he set off till he reached
     Quraish and said, "We have come from that man
     (i.e. Muhammad) whom we heard saying
     something which we will disclose to you if you
     should like." Some of the fools among Quraish
     shouted that they were not in need of this
     information, but the wiser among them said,
     "Relate what you heard him saying." Budail said,
     "I heard him saying so-and-so," relating what the
     Prophet had told him. 

     Urwa bin Mas'ud got up and said, "O people!
     Aren't you the sons? They said, "Yes." He
     added, "Am I not the father?" They said, "Yes."
     He said, "Do you mistrust me?" They said, "No."
     He said, "Don't you know that I invited the
     people of 'Ukaz for your help, and when they
     refused I brought my relatives and children and
     those who obeyed me (to help you)?" They said,
     "Yes." He said, "Well, this man (i.e. the Prophet)
     has offered you a reasonable proposal, you'd
     better accept it and allow me to meet him." They
     said, "You may meet him." So, he went to the
     Prophet and started talking to him. The Prophet
     told him almost the same as he had told Budail.
     Then Urwa said, "O Muhammad! Won't you feel
     any scruple in extirpating your relations? Have
     you ever heard of anyone amongst the Arabs
     extirpating his relatives before you? On the other
     hand, if the reverse should happen, (nobody will
     aid you, for) by Allah, I do not see (with you)
     dignified people, but people from various tribes
     who would run away leaving you alone." Hearing
     that, Abu Bakr abused him and said, "Do you
     say we would run and leave the Prophet alone?"
     Urwa said, "Who is that man?" They said, "He is
     Abu Bakr." Urwa said to Abu Bakr, "By Him in
     Whose Hands my life is, were it not for the favor
     which you did to me and which I did not
     compensate, I would retort on you." Urwa kept
     on talking to the Prophet and seizing the
     Prophet's beard as he was talking while
     Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba was standing near the
     head of the Prophet, holding a sword and
     wearing a helmet. Whenever Urwa stretched his
     hand towards the beard of the Prophet,
     Al-Mughira would hit his hand with the handle of
     the sword and say (to Urwa), "Remove your
     hand from the beard of Allah's Apostle." Urwa
     raised his head and asked, "Who is that?" The
     people said, "He is Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba."
     Urwa said, "O treacherous! Am I not doing my
     best to prevent evil consequences of your
     treachery?" 

     Before embracing Islam Al-Mughira was in the
     company of some people. He killed them and
     took their property and came (to Medina) to
     embrace Islam. The Prophet said (to him, "As
     regards your Islam, I accept it, but as for the
     property I do not take anything of it. (As it was
     taken through treason). Urwa then started
     looking at the Companions of the Prophet. By
     Allah, whenever Allah's Apostle spat, the spittle
     would fall in the hand of one of them (i.e. the
     Prophet's companions) who would rub it on his
     face and skin; if he ordered them they would
     carry his orders immediately; if he performed
     ablution, they would struggle to take the
     remaining water; and when they spoke to him,
     they would lower their voices and would not
     look at his face constantly out of respect. Urwa
     returned to his people and said, "O people! By
     Allah, I have been to the kings and to Caesar,
     Khosrau and An-Najashi, yet I have never seen
     any of them respected by his courtiers as much
     as Muhammad is respected by his companions.
     By Allah, if he spat, the spittle would fall in the
     hand of one of them (i.e. the Prophet's
     companions) who would rub it on his face and
     skin; if he ordered them, they would carry out his
     order immediately; if he performed ablution, they
     would struggle to take the remaining water; and
     when they spoke, they would lower their voices
     and would not look at his face constantly out of
     respect." Urwa added, "No doubt, he has
     presented to you a good reasonable offer, so
     please accept it." A man from the tribe of Bani
     Kinana said, "Allow me to go to him," and they
     allowed him, and when he approached the
     Prophet and his companions, Allah's Ap le I said,
     "He is so-and-so who belongs to the tribe that
     respects the Budn (i.e. camels of the sacrifice).
     So, bring the Budn in front of him." So, the Budn
     were brought before him and the people received
     him while they were reciting Talbiya. When he
     saw that scene, he said, "Glorified be Allah! It is
     not fair to prevent these people from visiting the
     Ka'ba." When he returned to his people, he said,
     'I saw the Budn garlanded (with colored knotted
     ropes) and marked (with stabs on their backs). I
     do not think it is advisable to prevent them from
     visiting the Ka'ba." Another person called Mikraz
     bin Hafs got up and sought their permission to go
     to Muhammad, and they allowed him, too. When
     he approached the Muslims, the Prophet said,
     "Here is Mikraz and he is a vicious man." Mikraz
     started talking to the Prophet and as he was
     talking, Suhail bin Amr came. 

     When Suhail bin Amr came, the Prophet said,
     "Now the matter has become easy." Suhail said
     to the Prophet "Please conclude a peace treaty
     with us." So, the Prophet called the clerk and
     said to him, "Write: By the Name of Allah, the
     most Beneficent, the most Merciful." Suhail said,
     "As for 'Beneficent,' by Allah, I do not know
     what it means. So write: By Your Name O Allah,
     as you used to write previously." The Muslims
     said, "By Allah, we will not write except: By the
     Name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most
     Merciful." The Prophet said, "Write: By Your
     Name O Allah." Then he dictated, "This is the
     peace treaty which Muhammad, Allah's Apostle
     has concluded." Suhail said, "By Allah, if we
     knew that you are Allah's Apostle we would not
     prevent you from visiting the Kaba, and would
     not fight with you. So, write: "Muhammad bin
     Abdullah." The Prophet said, "By Allah! I am
     Apostle of Allah even if you people do not
     believe me. Write: Muhammad bin Abdullah."
     (Az-Zuhri said, "The Prophet accepted all those
     things, as he had already said that he would
     accept everything they would demand if it
     respects the ordinance of Allah, (i.e. by letting
     him and his companions perform 'Umra.)" The
     Prophet said to Suhail, "On the condition that
     you allow us to visit the House (i.e. Ka'ba) so
     that we may perform Tawaf around it." Suhail
     said, "By Allah, we will not (allow you this year)
     so as not to give chance to the 'Arabs to say that
     we have yielded to you, but we will allow you
     next year." So, the Prophet got that written. 

     Then Suhail said, "We also stipulate that you
     should return to us whoever comes to you from
     us, even if he embraced your religion." The
     Muslims said, "Glorified be Allah! How will such
     a person be returned to the pagans after he has
     become a Muslim? While they were in this state
     Abu- Jandal bin Suhail bin 'Amr came from the
     valley of Mecca staggering with his fetters and
     fell down amongst the Muslims. Suhail said, "O
     Muhammad! This is the very first term with which
     we make peace with you, i.e. you shall return
     Abu Jandal to me." The Prophet said, "The
     peace treaty has not been written yet." Suhail
     said, "I will never allow you to keep him." The
     Prophet said, "Yes, do." He said, "I won't do.:
     Mikraz said, "We allow you (to keep him)." Abu
     Jandal said, "O Muslims! Will I be returned to
     the pagans though I have come as a Muslim?
     Don't you see how much I have suffered?" 

     Abu Jandal had been tortured severely for the
     Cause of Allah. Umar bin Al-Khattab said, "I
     went to the Prophet and said, 'Aren't you truly
     the Apostle of Allah?' The Prophet said, 'Yes,
     indeed.' I said, 'Isn't our Cause just and the
     cause of the enemy unjust?' He said, 'Yes.' I
     said, 'Then why should we be humble in our
     religion?' He said, 'I am Allah's Apostle and I do
     not disobey Him, and He will make me
     victorious.' I said, 'Didn't you tell us that we
     would go to the Ka'ba and perform Tawaf
     around it?' He said, 'Yes, but did I tell you that
     we would visit the Ka'ba this year?' I said, 'No.'
     He said, 'So you will visit it and perform Tawaf
     around it?' " Umar further said, "I went to Abu
     Bakr and said, 'O Abu Bakr! Isn't he truly
     Allah's Prophet?' He replied, 'Yes.' I said, 'Then
     why should we be humble in our religion?' He
     said, 'Indeed, he is Allah's Apostle and he does
     not disobey his Lord, and He will make him
     victorious. Adhere to him as, by Allah, he is on
     the right.' I said, 'Was he not telling us that we
     would go to the Kaba and perform Tawaf
     around it?' He said, 'Yes, but did he tell you that
     you would go to the Ka'ba this year?' I said,
     'No.' He said, "You will go to Ka'ba and
     perform Tawaf around it." (Az-Zuhri said, "
     'Umar said, 'I performed many good deeds as
     expiation for the improper questions I asked
     them.' ") 

     When the writing of the peace treaty was
     concluded, Allah's Apostle said to his
     companions, "Get up and' slaughter your
     sacrifices and get your head shaved." By Allah
     none of them got up, and the Prophet repeated
     his order thrice. When none of them got up, he
     left them and went to Um Salama and told her of
     the people's attitudes towards him. Um Salama
     said, "O the Prophet of Allah! Do you want your
     order to be carried out? Go out and don't say a
     word to anybody till you have slaughtered your
     sacrifice and call your barber to shave your
     head." So, the Prophet went out and did not talk
     to anyone of them till he did that, i.e. slaughtered
     the sacrifice and called his barber who shaved his
     head. Seeing that, the companions of the Prophet
     got up, slaughtered their sacrifices, and started
     shaving the heads of one another, and there was
     so much rush that there was a danger of killing
     each other. Then some believing women came
     (to the Prophet ); and Allah revealed the
     following Divine Verses:-- 

     "O you who believe, when the believing women
     come to you as emigrants examine them . . ."
     (60.10) 

     Umar then divorced two wives of his who were
     infidels. Later on Muawiya bin Abu Sufyan
     married one of them, and Safwan bin Umaya
     married the other. When the Prophet returned to
     Medina, Abu Basir, a new Muslim convert from
     Quraish came to him. The Infidels sent in his
     pursuit two men who said (to the Prophet ),
     "Abide by the promise you gave us." So, the
     Prophet handed him over to them. They took him
     out (of the City) till they reached Dhul-Hulaifa
     where they dismounted to eat some dates they
     had with them. Abu Basir said to one of them,
     "By Allah, O so-and-so, I see you have a fine
     sword." The other drew it out (of the scabbard)
     and said, "By Allah, it is very fine and I have tried
     it many times." Abu Bair said, "Let me have a
     look at it." 

     When the other gave it to him, he hit him with it
     till he died, and his companion ran away till he
     came to Medina and entered the Mosque
     running. When Allah's Apostle saw him he said,
     "This man appears to have been frightened."
     When he reached the Prophet he said, "My
     companion has been murdered and I would have
     been murdered too." Abu Basir came and said,
     "O Allah's Apostle, by Allah, Allah has made you
     fulfill your obligations by your returning me to
     them (i.e. the Infidels), but Allah has saved me
     from them." The Prophet said, "Woe to his
     mother! what excellent war kindler he would be,
     should he only have supporters." When Abu
     Basir heard that he understood that the Prophet
     would return him to them again, so he set off till
     he reached the seashore. Abu Jandal bin Suhail
     got himself released from them (i.e. infidels) and
     joined Abu Basir. So, whenever a man from
     Quraish embraced Islam he would follow Abu
     Basir till they formed a strong group. By Allah,
     whenever they heard about a caravan of Quraish
     heading towards Sham, they stopped it and
     attacked and killed them (i.e. infidels) and took
     their properties. The people of Quraish sent a
     message to the Prophet requesting him for the
     Sake of Allah and Kith and kin to send for (i.e.
     Abu Basir and his companions) promising that
     whoever (amongst them) came to the Prophet
     would be secure. So the Prophet sent for them
     (i.e. Abu Basir's companions) and Allah I
     revealed the following Divine Verses: 

     "And it is He Who Has withheld their hands from
     you and your hands From them in the midst of
     Mecca, After He made you the victorious over
     them. . . . the unbelievers had pride and
     haughtiness, in their hearts . . . the pride and
     haughtiness of the time of ignorance." (48.24-26)
     And their pride and haughtiness was that they did
     not confess (write in the treaty) that he (i.e.
     Muhammad) was the Prophet of Allah and
     refused to write: "In the Name of Allah, the most
     Beneficent, the Most Merciful," and prevented
     the Mushriks from visiting the Ka'ba. 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: Urwa said, "Aisha told me
     that Allah's Apostle used to examine the women
     emigrants. We have been told also that when
     Allah revealed the order that the Muslims should
     return to the pagans what they had spent on their
     wives who emigrated (after embracing Islam) and
     that the Mushriks should not. keep unbelieving
     women as their wives, 'Umar divorced two of his
     wives, Qariba, the daughter of Abu Urhaiya and
     the daughter of Jarwal Al-Khuza'i. Later on
     Mu'awlya married Qariba and Abu Jahm married
     the other." 

     When the pagans refused to pay what the
     Muslims had spent on their wives, Allah revealed:
     "And if any of your wives have gone from you to
     the unbelievers and you have an accession (By
     the coming over of a woman from the other side)
     (Then pay to those whose wives have gone) The
     equivalent of what they had spent (On their
     Mahr)." (60.11) 

     So, Allah ordered that the Muslim whose wife,
     has gone, should be given, as a compensation of
     the Mahr he had given to his wife, from the Mahr
     of the wives of the pagans who had emigrated
     deserting their husbands. 

     We do not know any of the women emigrants
     who deserted Islam after embracing it. We have
     also been told that Abu Basir bin Asid
     Ath-Thaqafi came to the Prophet as a Muslim
     emigrant during the truce. Al-Akhnas bin Shariq
     wrote to the Prophet requesting him to return
     Abu Basir. 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 892: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle mentioned a person who asked
     an Israeli man to lend him one-thousand Dinars,
     and the Israeli lent him the sum for a certain fixed
     period. 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 893: 

     Narrated Amra: 

     Aisha said that Buraira came to seek her help in
     the writing of her emancipation. 'Aisha said to
     her, "If you wish, I will pay your masters (your
     price) and the wala' will be for me." When
     Allah's Apostle came, she told him about it. The
     Prophet said to her, "Buy her (i.e. Buraira) and
     manumit her, for the Wala is for the one who
     manumits." Then Allah's Apostle ascended the
     pulpit and said, "What about those people who
     stipulate conditions which are not in Allah's
     Laws? Whoever stipulates such conditions as are
     not in Allah's Laws, then those conditions are
     invalid even if he stipulated a hundred such
     conditions." 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 894: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Allah has ninety-nine
     names, i.e. one-hundred minus one, and whoever
     knows them will go to Paradise." (Please see
     Hadith No. 419 Vol. 8) 


Volume 3, Book 50, Number 895: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Umar bin Khattab got some land in Khaibar and
     he went to the Prophet to consult him about it
     saying, "O Allah' Apostle got some land in
     Khaibar better than which I have never had,
     what do you suggest that I do with it?" The
     Prophet said, "If you like you can give the land as
     endowment and give its fruits in charity." So
     Umar gave it in charity as an endowment on the
     condition that would not be sold nor given to
     anybody as a present and not to be inherited, but
     its yield would be given in charity to the poor
     people, to the Kith and kin, for freeing slaves, for
     Allah's Cause, to the travelers and guests; and
     that there would be no harm if the guardian of the
     endowment ate from it according to his need with
     good intention, and fed others without storing it
     for the future." 



