
Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 57: 

 Companions of the Prophet 

Volume 5, Book 57, Number 1: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     "Allah's Apostle said, "A time will come upon the
     people, when a group of people will wage a holy
     war and it will be said, 'Is there amongst you
     anyone who has accompanied Allah's Apostle?'
     They will say, 'Yes.' And so victory will be
     bestowed on them. Then a time will come upon
     the people when a group of people will wage a
     holy war, and it will be said, "Is there amongst
     you a none who has accompanied the
     companions of Allah's Apostle?' They will say,
     'Yes.' And so victory will be bestowed on them.
     Then a time will come upon the people when a
     group of people will wage a holy war, and it will
     be said, "Is there amongst you anyone who has
     been in the company of the companions of the
     companions of Allah's Apostle ?' They will say,
     'Yes.' And victory will be bestowed on them." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 2: 

     Narrated Imran bin Husain: 

     "Allah's Apostle said, 'The best of my followers
     are those living in my generation (i.e. my
     contemporaries). and then those who will follow
     the latter" 'Imran added, "I do not remember
     whether he mentioned two or three generations
     after his generation, then the Prophet added,
     'There will come after you, people who will bear
     witness without being asked to do so, and will be
     treacherous and untrustworthy, and they will vow
     and never fulfill their vows, and fatness will
     appear among them." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 3: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "The best people are those
     living in my generation, and then those who will
     follow them, and then those who will follow the
     latter. Then there will come some people who
     will bear witness before taking oaths, and take
     oaths before bearing witness." (Ibrahim, a
     sub-narrator said, "They used to beat us for
     witnesses and covenants when we were still
     children.") 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 4: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     Abu Bakr bought a (camel) saddle from 'Azib for
     thirteen Dirhams. Abu Bakr said to 'Azib, "Tell
     Al-Bara' to carry the saddle for me." 'Azib said,
     "No, unless you relate to me what happened to
     you and Allah 's Apostle when you left Mecca
     while the pagans were in search of you." Abu
     Bakr said, "We left Mecca and we travel led
     continuously for that night and the following day
     till it was midday. I looked (around) searching for
     shade to take as shelter, and suddenly I came
     across a rock, and found a little shade there. So I
     cleaned the place and spread a bed for the
     Prophet in the shade and said to him, 'Lie down,
     O Allah's Apostle.' So the Prophet lay down and
     I went out, looking around to see if there was
     any person pursuing us. Suddenly I saw a
     shepherd driving his sheep towards the rock,
     seeking what we had already sought from it. I
     asked him, 'To whom do you belong, O boy?'
     He said, 'I belong to a man from Quraish.' He
     named the man and I recognized him. I asked
     him, 'Is there any milk with your sheep?' He said,
     'Yes.' I said, 'Will you then milk (some) for us?'
     He said, 'Yes.' Then I asked him to tie the legs of
     one of the sheep and clean its udder, and then
     ordered him to clean his hands from dust. Then
     the shepherd cleaned his hands by striking his
     hands against one another. After doing so, he
     milked a small amount of milk. I used to keep for
     Allah's Apostle a leather water-container, the
     mouth of which was covered with a piece of
     cloth. I poured water on the milk container till its
     lower part was cold. Then I took the milk to the
     Prophet whom I found awake. I said to him,
     'Drink, O Allah's Apostle.' So he drank till I
     became pleased. Then I said, 'It is time for us to
     move, O Allahs Apostle!' He said, 'Yes.' So we
     set out while the people (i.e. Quraish pagans)
     were searching for us, but none found us except
     Suraiqa bin Malik bin Jushum who was riding his
     horse. I said, 'These are our pursuers who have
     found us. O Allah's Apostle!' He said, 'Do not
     grieve, for Allah is with us." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 5: 

     Narrated Abu Bakr: 

     I said to the Prophet while I was in the Cave. "If
     any of them should look under his feet, he would
     see us." He said, "O Abu Bakr! What do you
     think of two (persons) the third of whom is
     Allah?" 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 6: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle addressed the people saying,
     "Allah has given option to a slave to choose this
     world or what is with Him. The slave has chosen
     what is with Allah." Abu Bakr wept, and we
     were astonished at his weeping caused by what
     the Prophet mentioned as to a Slave ( of Allah)
     who had been offered a choice, (we learned later
     on) that Allah's Apostle himself was the person
     who was given the choice, and that Abu Bakr
     knew best of all of us. Allah's Apostle added,
     "The person who has favored me most of all both
     with his company and wealth, is Abu Bakr. If I
     were to take a Khalil other than my Lord, I
     would have taken Abu Bakr as such, but (what
     relates us) is the Islamic brotherhood and
     friendliness. All the gates of the Mosque should
     be closed except the gate of Abu Bakr." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 7: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     We used to compare the people as to who was
     better during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle . We
     used to regard Abu Bakr as the best, then
     'Umar, and then 'Uthman . 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 8: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "If I were to take a Khalil, I
     would have taken Abu Bakr, but he is my
     brother and my companion (in Islam)." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 9: 

     Narrated Aiyub: 

     The Prophet said, "If I were to take a Khalil, I
     would have taken him (i.e. Abu Bakr) as a
     Khalil, but the Islamic brotherhood is better." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 10: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Mulaika: 

     The people of Kufa sent a letter to Ibn
     Az-Zubair, asking about (the inheritance of)
     (paternal) grandfather. He replied that the right of
     the inheritance of (paternal) grandfather is the
     same as that of father if the father is dead) and
     added, "Allah's Apostle said, ' If I were to take a
     Khalil from this nation, I would have taken him
     (i.e. Abu Bakr)." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 11: 

     Narrated Jubair bin Mutim: 

     A woman came to the Prophet who ordered her
     to return to him again. She said, "What if I came
     and did not find you?" as if she wanted to say, "If
     I found you dead?" The Prophet said, "If you
     should not find me, go to Abu Bakr." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 12: 

     Narrated 'Ammar: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle and there was none with
     him but five slaves, two women and Abu Bakr
     (i.e. those were the only converts to Islam then). 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 13: 

     Narrated Abu Ad-Darda: 

     While I was sitting with the Prophet, Abu Bakr
     came, lifting up one corner of h is garment
     uncovering h is knee. The Prophet said, "Your
     companion has had a quarrel." Abu Bakr greeted
     (the Prophet ) and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     There was something (i.e. quarrel) between me
     and the Son of Al-Khattab. I talked to him
     harshly and then regretted that, and requested
     him to forgive me, but he refused. This is why I
     have come to you." The Prophet said thrice, "O
     Abu Bakr! May Allah forgive you." In the
     meanwhile, 'Umar regretted (his refusal of Abu
     Bakr's excuse) and went to Abu Bakr's house
     and asked if Abu Bakr was there. They replied in
     the negative. So he came to the Prophet and
     greeted him, but signs of displeasure appeared
     on the face of the Prophet till Abu Bakr pitied
     ('Umar), so he knelt and said twice, "O Allah's
     Apostle! By Allah! I was more unjust to him
     (than he to me)." The Prophet said, "Allah sent
     me (as a Prophet) to you (people) but you said
     (to me), 'You are telling a lie,' while Abu Bakr
     said, 'He has said the truth,' and consoled me
     with himself and his money." He then said twice,
     "Won't you then give up harming my
     companion?" After that nobody harmed Abu
     Bakr. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 14: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Al-As: 

     The Prophet deputed me to read the Army of
     Dhat-as-Salasil. I came to him and said, "Who is
     the most beloved person to you?" He said, "
     'Aisha." I asked, "Among the men?" He said,
     "Her father." I said, "Who then?" He said, "Then
     'Umar bin Al-Khattab." He then named other
     men. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 15: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While a
     shepherd was amongst his sheep, a wolf
     attacked them and took away one sheep. When
     the shepherd chased the wolf, the wolf turned
     towards him and said, 'Who will be its guard on
     the day of wild animals when nobody except I
     will be its shepherd. And while a man was driving
     a cow with a load on it, it turned towards him
     and spoke to him saying, 'I have not been
     created for this purpose, but for ploughing." The
     people said, "Glorified be Allah." The Prophet
     said, "But I believe in it and so does Abu Bakr
     end 'Umar." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 16: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While I was
     sleeping, I saw myself standing at a well, on it
     there was a bucket. I drew water from the well
     as much as Allah wished. Then Ibn Abi Quhafa
     (i.e. Abu Bakr) took the bucket from me and
     brought out one or two buckets (of water) and
     there was weakness in his drawing the water.
     May Allah forgive his weakness for him. Then
     the bucket turned into a very big one and Ibn
     Al-Khattab took it over and I had never seen
     such a mighty person amongst the people as him
     in performing such hard work, till the people
     drank to their satisfaction and watered their
     camels that knelt down there." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 17: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     That Allah's Apostle said, "Allah will not look on
     the Day of Judgment at him who drags his robe
     (behind him) out of pride." Abu Bakr said "One
     side of my robe slacks down unless I get very
     cautious about it." Allah's Apostle said, "But you
     do not do that with a pride." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 18: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Anybody who
     spends a pair of something in Allah's Cause will
     be called from all the gates of Paradise, "O
     Allah's slave! This is good.' He who is amongst
     those who pray will be called from the gate of the
     prayer (in Paradise) and he who is from the
     people of Jihad will be called from the gate of
     Jihad, and he who is from those' who give in
     charity (i.e. Zakat) will be called from the gate of
     charity, and he who is amongst those who
     observe fast will be called from the gate of
     fasting, the gate of Raiyan." Abu Bakr said, "He
     who is called from all those gates will need
     nothing," He added, "Will anyone be called from
     all those gates, O Allah's Apostle?" He said,
     "Yes, and I hope you will be among those, O
     Abu Bakr." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 19: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle died
     while Abu Bakr was at a place called As-Sunah
     (Al-'Aliya) 'Umar stood up and said, "By Allah!
     Allah's Apostle is not dead!" 'Umar (later on)
     said, "By Allah! Nothing occurred to my mind
     except that." He said, "Verily! Allah will resurrect
     him and he will cut the hands and legs of some
     men." Then Abu Bakr came and uncovered the
     face of Allah's Apostle, kissed him and said, "Let
     my mother and father be sacrificed for you, (O
     Allah's Apostle), you are good in life and in
     death. By Allah in Whose Hands my life is, Allah
     will never make you taste death twice." Then he
     went out and said, "O oath-taker! Don't be
     hasty." When Abu Bakr spoke, 'Umar sat down.
     Abu Bakr praised and glorified Allah and said,
     No doubt! Whoever worshipped Muhammad,
     then Muhammad is dead, but whoever
     worshipped Allah, then Allah is Alive and shall
     never die." Then he recited Allah's Statement.:--
     "(O Muhammad) Verily you will die, and they
     also will die." (39.30) He also recited:-- 

     "Muhammad is no more than an Apostle; and
     indeed many Apostles have passed away, before
     him, If he dies Or is killed, will you then Turn
     back on your heels? And he who turns back On
     his heels, not the least Harm will he do to Allah
     And Allah will give reward to those Who are
     grateful." (3.144) 

     The people wept loudly, and the Ansar were
     assembled with Sad bin 'Ubada in the shed of
     Bani Saida. They said (to the emigrants). "There
     should be one 'Amir from us and one from you."
     Then Abu Bakr, Umar bin Al-Khattab and Abu
     'baida bin Al-Jarrah went to them. 'Umar wanted
     to speak but Abu Bakr stopped him. 'Umar later
     on used to say, "By Allah, I intended only to say
     something that appealed to me and I was afraid
     that Abu Bakr would not speak so well. Then
     Abu Bakr spoke and his speech was very
     eloquent. He said in his statement, "We are the
     rulers and you (Ansars) are the ministers (i.e.
     advisers)," Hubab bin Al-Mundhir said, "No, by
     Allah we won't accept this. But there must be a
     ruler from us and a ruler from you." Abu Bakr
     said, "No, we will be the rulers and you will be
     the ministers, for they (i.e. Quarish) are the best
     family amongst the 'Arabs and of best origin. So
     you should elect either 'Umar or Abu 'Ubaida bin
     Al-Jarrah as your ruler." 'Umar said (to Abu
     Bakr), "No but we elect you, for you are our
     chief and the best amongst us and the most
     beloved of all of us to Allah's Apostle." So 'Umar
     took Abu Bakr's hand and gave the pledge of
     allegiance and the people too gave the pledge of
     allegiance to Abu Bakr. Someone said, "You
     have killed Sad bin Ubada." 'Umar said, "Allah
     has killed him." 'Aisha said (in another narration),
     ("When the Prophet was on his death-bed) he
     looked up and said thrice, (Amongst) the Highest
     Companion (See Qur'an 4.69)' Aisha said, Allah
     benefited the people by their two speeches.
     'Umar frightened the people some of whom were
     hypocrites whom Allah caused to abandon Islam
     because of 'Umar's speech. Then Abu Bakr led
     the people to True Guidance and acquainted
     them with the right path they were to follow so
     that they went out reciting:-- "Muhammad is no
     more than an Apostle and indeed many Apostles
     have passed away before him.." (3.144) 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 20: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Hanafiya: 

     I asked my father ('Ali bin Abi Talib), "Who are
     the best people after Allah's Apostle ?" He said,
     "Abu Bakr." I asked, "Who then?" He said,
     "Then 'Umar. " I was afraid he would say
     "Uthman, so I said, "Then you?" He said, "I am
     only an ordinary person. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 21: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We went out with Allah's Apostle on one of his
     journeys till we reached Al-Baida or Dhatul-Jaish
     where my necklace got broken (and lost). Allah's
     Apostle stopped to search for it and the people
     too stopped with him. There was no water at that
     place and they had no water with them. So they
     went to Abu Bakr and said, "Don't you see what
     'Aisha has done? She has made Allah's Apostle
     and the people stop where there is no water and
     they have no water with them. Abu Bakr came
     while Allah's Apostle was sleeping with his head
     on my thigh and said, "You detained Allah
     Apostle and the people where there is no water
     and they have no water." He then admonished
     me and said what Allah wished and pinched me
     at my flanks with his hands, but I did not move
     because the head of Allah's Apostle was on my
     thigh . 

     Allah's Apostle kept on sleeping till be got up in
     the morning and found no water. Then Allah
     revealed the Divine Verse of Tayammum, and
     the people performed Tayammum. Usaid bin
     AlHudair said. "O family of Abu Bakr! This is
     not the first blessings of yours." We urged the
     camel on which I was sitting to get up from its
     place and the necklace was found under it. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 22: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     The Prophet said, "Do not abuse my companions
     for if any one of you spent gold equal to Uhud (in
     Allah's Cause) it would not be equal to a Mud or
     even a half Mud spent by one of them." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 23: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari: 

     I performed ablution in my house and then went
     out and said, "Today I shall stick to Allah's
     Apostle and stay with him all this day of mine (in
     his service)." I went to the Mosque and asked
     about the Prophet . They said, "He had gone in
     this direction." So I followed his way, asking
     about him till he entered a place called Bir Aris. I
     sat at its gate that was made of date-palm leaves
     till the Prophet finished answering the call of
     nature and performed ablution. Then I went up to
     him to see him sitting at the well of Aris at the
     middle of its edge with his legs uncovered,
     hanging in the well. I greeted him and went back
     and sat at the gate. I said, "Today I will be the
     gatekeeper of the Prophet." Abu Bakr came and
     pushed the gate. I asked, "Who is it?" He said,
     "Abu Bakr." I told him to wait, went in and said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! Abu Bakr asks for
     permission to enter." He said, "Admit him and
     give him the glad tidings that he will be in
     Paradise." So I went out and said to Abu Bakr,
     "Come in, and Allah's Apostle gives you the glad
     tidings that you will be in Paradise" Abu Bakr
     entered and sat on the right side of Allah's
     Apostle on the built edge of the well and hung his
     legs n the well as the Prophet did and uncovered
     his legs. I then returned and sat (at the gate). I
     had left my brother performing ablution and he
     intended to follow me. So I said (to myself). "If
     Allah wants good for so-and-so (i.e. my brother)
     He will bring him here." Suddenly somebody
     moved the door. I asked, "Who is it?" He said,
     "'Umar bin Al-Khattab." I asked him to wait,
     went to Allah's Apostle, greeted him and said,
     'Umar bin Al-Khattab asks the permission to
     enter." He said, "Admit him, and give him the
     glad tidings that he will be in Paradise." I went to
     "Umar and said "Come in, and Allah's Apostle,
     gives you the glad tidings that you will be in
     Paradise." So he entered and sat beside Allah's
     Apostle on the built edge of the well on the left
     side and hung his legs in the well. I returned and
     sat (at the gate) and said, (to myself), "If Allah
     wants good for so-and-so, He will bring him
     here." Somebody came and moved the door. I
     asked "Who is it?" He replied, "Uthman bin
     Affan." I asked him to wait and went to the
     Prophet and informed him. He said, "Admit him,
     and give him the glad tidings of entering Paradise,
     I asked him to wait and went to the Prophet and
     informed him. He said, "Adult him, and give him
     the glad tidings of entering Paradise after a
     calamity that will befall him." So I went up to him
     and said to him, "Come in; Allah's Apostle gives
     you the glad tidings of entering Paradise after a
     calamity that will befall you. "Uthman then came
     in and found that the built edge of the well was
     occupied, so he sat opposite to the Prophet on
     the other side. Said bin Al-Musaiyab said, "I
     interpret this (narration) in terms of their graves." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 24: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet once climbed the mountain of Uhud
     with Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman. The
     mountain shook with them. The Prophet said (to
     the mountain), "Be firm, O Uhud! For on you
     there are no more than a Prophet, a Siddiq and
     two martyrs. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 25: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: Allah's Apostle
     said. "While (in a dream), I was standing by a
     well, drawing water from it. Abu Bakr and 'Umar
     came to me. Abu Bakr took the bucket (from
     me) and drew one or two buckets of water, and
     there was some weakness 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 26: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     While I was standing amongst the people who
     were invoking Allah for Umar bin Al-Khattab
     who was lying (dead) on his bed, a man behind
     me rested his elbows on my shoulder and said,
     "(O 'Umar!) May Allah bestow His Mercy on
     you. I always hoped that Allah will keep you with
     your two companions, for I often heard Allah's
     Apostle saying, "I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar were
     (somewhere). I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar did
     (something). I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar set out.' So
     I hoped that Allah will keep you with both of
     them." I turned back to see that the speaker was
     Ali bin Abi Talib. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 27: 

     Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 

     I asked 'Abdullah bin 'Amr, "What was the worst
     thing the pagans did to Allah's Apostle?" He said,
     "I saw 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait coming to the
     Prophet while he was praying.' Uqba put his
     sheet round the Prophet's neck and squeezed it
     very severely. Abu Bakr came and pulled 'Uqba
     away from the Prophet and said, "Do you intend
     to kill a man just because he says: 'My Lord is
     Allah, and he has brought forth to you the
     Evident Signs from your Lord?" 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 28: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "I saw myself (in a dream)
     entering Paradise, and behold! I saw
     Ar-Rumaisa', Abu Talha's wife. I heard
     footsteps. I asked, Who is it? Somebody said, 'It
     is Bilal ' Then I saw a palace and a lady sitting in
     its courtyard. I asked, 'For whom is this palace?'
     Somebody replied, 'It is for 'Umar.' I intended to
     enter it and see it, but I thought of your ('Umar's)
     Ghira (and gave up the attempt)." 'Umar said,
     "Let my parents be sacrificed for you, O Allah's
     Apostle! How dare I think of my Ghira
     (self-respect) being offended by you? 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 29: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     While we were with Allah's Apostle he said,
     "While I was sleeping, I saw myself in Paradise,
     and suddenly I saw a woman performing ablution
     beside a palace. I asked, 'For whom is this
     palace?' They replied, 'It is for 'Umar.' Then I
     remembered 'Umar's Ghira (self-respect) and
     went away quickly." Umar wept and Said, O
     Allah's Apostle! How dare I think of my ghira
     (self-respect) being offended by you? 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 30: 

     Narrated Hamza's father: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, I
     saw myself drinking (i.e. milk), and I was so
     contented that I saw the milk flowing through my
     nails. Then I gave (the milk) to 'Umar." They (i.e.
     the companions of the Prophet) asked, "What do
     you interpret it?" He said, "Knowledge." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 31: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "In a dream I saw myself
     drawing water from a well with a bucket. Abu
     Bakr came and drew a bucket or two weakly.
     May Allah forgive him. Then 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab came and the bucket turned into a
     very large one in his hands. I had never seen such
     a mighty person as he in doing such hard work till
     all the people drank to their satisfaction and
     watered their camels that knelt down there. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 32: 

     Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas: 

     Umar bin Al-Khattab asked the permission of
     Allah's Apostle to see him while some Quraishi
     women were sitting with him, talking to him and
     asking him for more expenses, raising their voices
     above the voice of Allah's Apostle. 

     When 'Umar asked for the permission to enter,
     the women quickly put on their veils. Allah'›
     Apostle allowed him to enter and 'Umar came in
     while Allah's Apostle was smiling, 'Umar said "O
     Allah's Apostle! May Allah always keep you
     smiling." The Prophet said, "These women who
     have been here, roused my wonder, for as soon
     as they heard your voice, they quickly put on
     their veils. "'Umar said, "O Allah's Apostle! You
     have more right to be feared by them than I."
     Then 'Umar addressed the women saying, "O
     enemies of yourselves! You fear me more than
     you do Allah's Apostle ?" They said, "Yes, for
     you are harsher and sterner than Allah's
     Apostle." Then Allah's Apostle said, "O Ibn
     Al-Khattab! By Him in Whose Hands my life is!
     Never does Satan find you going on a way, but
     he takes another way other than yours." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 33: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     We have been powerful since 'Umar embraced
     Islam. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 34: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When (the dead body of) 'Umar was put on his
     deathbed, the people gathered around him and
     invoked (Allah) and prayed for him before the
     body was taken away, and I was amongst them.
     Suddenly I felt somebody taking hold of my
     shoulder and found out that he was 'Ali bin Abi
     Talib. 'Ali invoked Allah's Mercy for 'Umar and
     said, "O 'Umar! You have not left behind you a
     person whose deeds I like to imitate and meet
     Allah with more than I like your deeds. By Allah!
     I always thought that Allah would keep you with
     your two companions, for very often I used to
     hear the Prophet saying, 'I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar
     went (somewhere); I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar
     entered (somewhere); and I, Abu Bakr and
     'Umar went out."' 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 35: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet ascended the mountain of Uhud and
     he was accompanied by Abu Bakr, 'Umar and
     'Uthman. The mountain shook beneath them. The
     Prophet hit it with his foot and said, "O Uhud !
     Be firm, for on you there is none but a Prophet, a
     Siddiq and a martyr (i.e. and two martyrs). 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 36: 

     Narrated Aslam: 

     Ibn 'Umar asked me about some matters
     concerning 'Umar. He said, "Since Allah's
     Apostle died. I have never seen anybody more
     serious, hard working and generous than 'Umar
     bin Al-Khattab (till the end of his life." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 37: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     A man asked the Prophet about the Hour (i.e.
     Day of Judgment) saying, "When will the Hour
     be?" The Prophet said, "What have you
     prepared for it?" The man said, "Nothing, except
     that I love Allah and His Apostle." The Prophet
     said, "You will be with those whom you love."
     We had never been so glad as we were on
     hearing that saying of the Prophet (i.e., "You will
     be with those whom you love.") Therefore, I love
     the Prophet, Abu Bakr and 'Umar, and I hope
     that I will be with them because of my love for
     them though my deeds are not similar to theirs. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 38: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Among the nations before
     you there used to be people who were inspired
     (though they were not prophets). And if there is
     any of such a persons amongst my followers, it is
     'Umar." 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said,
     "Among the nation of Bani Israel who lived
     before you, there were men who used to be
     inspired with guidance though they were not
     prophets, and if there is any of such persons
     amongst my followers, it is 'Umar." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 39: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whilst a shepherd was
     amongst his sheep, a wolf attacked them and
     took away a sheep. The shepherd chased it and
     got that sheep freed from the wolf. The wolf
     turned towards the shepherd and said, 'Who will
     guard the sheep on the day of wild animals when
     it will have no shepherd except myself?" The
     people said, "Glorified be Allah." The Prophet
     said, "But I believe in it and so do Abu Bakr and
     'Umar although Abu Bakr and 'Umar were not
     present there (at the place of the event). 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 40: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "While I was
     sleeping, the people were presented to me (in a
     dream). They were wearing shirts, some of which
     were merely covering their (chests). and some
     were a bit longer. 'Umar was presented before
     me and his shirt was so long that he was dragging
     it." They asked, "How have you interpreted it, O
     Allah's Apostle?" He said, "Religion." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 41: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama: 

     When 'Umar was stabbed, he showed signs of
     agony. Ibn 'Abbas, as if intending to encourage
     'Umar, said to him, "O Chief of the believers!
     Never mind what has happened to you, for you
     have been in the company of Allah's Apostle and
     you kept good relations with him and you parted
     with him while he was pleased with you. Then
     you were in the company of Abu Bakr and kept
     good relations with him and you parted with him
     (i.e. he died) while he was pleased with you.
     Then you were in the company of the Muslims,
     and you kept good relations with them, and if
     you leave them, you will leave them while they
     are pleased with you." 'Umar said, (to Ibn
     "Abbas), "As for what you have said about the
     company of Allah's Apostle and his being
     pleased with me, it is a favor, Allah did to me;
     and as for what you have said about the
     company of Abu Bakr and his being pleased with
     me, it is a favor Allah did to me; and concerning
     my impatience which you see, is because of you
     and your companions. By Allah! If (at all) I had
     gold equal to the earth, I would have ransomed
     myself with it from the Punishment of Allah
     before I meet Him." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 42: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     While I was with the Prophet in one of the
     gardens of Medina, a man came and asked me
     to open the gate. The Prophet said to me, "Open
     the gate for him and give him the glad tidings that
     he will enter Paradise." I opened (the gate) for
     him, and behold! It was Abu Bakr. I informed
     him of the glad tidings the Prophet had said, and
     he praised Allah. Then another man came and
     asked me to open the gate. The Prophet said to
     me "Open (the gate) and give him the glad tidings
     of entering Paradise." I opened (the gate) for
     him, and behold! It was 'Umar. I informed him of
     what the Prophet had said, and he praised Allah.
     Then another man came and asked me to open
     the gate. The Prophet said to me. "Open (the
     gate) for him and inform him of the glad tidings,
     of entering Paradise with a calamity which will
     befall him. " Behold ! It was 'Uthman, I informed
     him of what Allah's Apostle had said. He praised
     Allah and said, "I seek Allah's Aid." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 43: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Hisham: 

     We were with the Prophet while he was holding
     'Umar bin Al-Khattab by the hand. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 44: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet entered a garden and ordered me to
     guard its gate. A man came and asked
     permission to enter. The Prophet said, "Admit
     him and give him the glad tidings of entering
     Paradise." Behold! It was Abu Bakr. Another
     man came and asked the permission to enter.
     The Prophet said, "Admit him and give him the
     glad tidings of entering Paradise." Behold! It was
     'Umar. Then another man came, asking the
     permission to enter. The Prophet kept silent for a
     short while and then said, "Admit him and give
     him the glad tidings of entering Paradise with a
     calamity which will befall him." Behold! It was
     'Uthman bin 'Affan. 'Asim, in another narration,
     said that the Prophet was sitting in a place where
     there was water, and he was uncovering both his
     knees or his knee, and when 'Uthman entered, he
     covered them (or it). 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 45: 

     Narrated 'Ubaid-ullah bin 'Adi bin Al-Khiyar: 

     Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and 'Abdur-Rahman
     bin Al-Aswad bin 'Abu Yaghuth said (to me),
     "What forbids you to talk to 'Uthman about his
     brother Al-Walid because people have talked
     much about him?" So I went to 'Uthman and
     when he went out for prayer I said (to him), "I
     have something to say to you and it is a piece of
     advice for you " 'Uthman said, "O man, from
     you." (Umar said: I see that he said, "I seek
     Refuge with Allah from you.") So I left him and
     went to them. Then the messenger of Uthman
     came and I went to him (i.e. 'Uthman), 'Uthman
     asked, "What is your advice?" I replied, "Allah
     sent Muhammad with the Truth, and revealed the
     Divine Book (i.e. Quran) to him; and you were
     amongst those who followed Allah and His
     Apostle, and you participated in the two
     migrations (to Ethiopia and to Medina) and
     enjoyed the company of Allah's Apostle and saw
     his way. No doubt, the people are talking much
     about Al-Walid." 'Uthman said, "Did you receive
     your knowledge directly from Allah's Apostle ?"
     I said, "No, but his knowledge did reach me and
     it reached (even) to a virgin in her seclusion."
     'Uthman said, "And then Allah sent Muhammad
     with the Truth and I was amongst those who
     followed Allah and His Apostle and I believed in
     what ever he (i.e. the Prophet) was sent with,
     and participated in two migrations, as you have
     said, and I enjoyed the company of Allah's
     Apostle and gave the pledge of allegiance him.
     By Allah! I never disobeyed him, nor did I cheat
     him till Allah took him unto Him. Then I treated
     Abu Bakr and then 'Umar similarly and then I
     was made Caliph. So, don't I have rights similar
     to theirs?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Then what are
     these talks reaching me from you people? Now,
     concerning what you mentioned about the
     question of Al-Walid, Allah willing, I shall deal
     with him according to what is right." Then he
     called 'Ali and ordered him to flog him, and 'Ali
     flogged him (i.e. Al-Walid) eighty lashes. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 46: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle ascended the (mountain) of Uhud
     with Abu Bakr and 'Uthman and it shook. Allah's
     Apostle said, "Be calm, O Uhud!" I think he
     stroked it with his foot and added, "There is none
     on you but a Prophet, a Siddiq and two martyrs."
     (The two martyrs were Umar and Uthman) (See
     Hadith No. 24) 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 47: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     During the lifetime of the Prophet we considered
     Abu Bakr as peerless and then 'Umar and then
     'Uthman (coming next to him in superiority) and
     then we used not to differentiate between the
     companions of the Prophet 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 48: 

     Narrated 'Uthman: 

     (the son of Muhib) An Egyptian who came and
     performed the Hajj to the Kaba saw some
     people sitting. He enquire, "Who are these
     people?" Somebody said, "They are the tribe of
     Quraish." He said, "Who is the old man sitting
     amongst them?" The people replied, "He is
     'Abdullah bin 'Umar." He said, "O Ibn Umar! I
     want to ask you about something; please tell me
     about it. Do you know that 'Uthman fled away
     on the day (of the battle) of Uhud?" Ibn 'Umar
     said, "Yes." The (Egyptian) man said, "Do you
     know that 'Uthman was absent on the day (of the
     battle) of Badr and did not join it?" Ibn 'Umar
     said, "Yes." The man said, "Do you know that he
     failed to attend the Ar Ridwan pledge and did
     not witness it (i.e. Hudaibiya pledge of
     allegiance)?" Ibn 'Umar said, "Yes." The man
     said, "Allahu Akbar!" Ibn 'Umar said, "Let me
     explain to you (all these three things). As for his
     flight on the day of Uhud, I testify that Allah has
     excused him and forgiven him; and as for his
     absence from the battle of Badr, it was due to
     the fact that the daughter of Allah's Apostle was
     his wife and she was sick then. Allah's Apostle
     said to him, "You will receive the same reward
     and share (of the booty) as anyone of those who
     participated in the battle of Badr (if you stay with
     her).' As for his absence from the Ar-Ridwan
     pledge of allegiance, had there been any person
     in Mecca more respectable than 'Uthman (to be
     sent as a representative). Allah's Apostle would
     have sent him instead of him. No doubt, Allah's
     Apostle had sent him, and the incident of the
     Ar-Ridwan pledge of Allegiance happened after
     'Uthman had gone to Mecca. Allah's Apostle
     held out his right hand saying, 'This is 'Uthman's
     hand.' He stroke his (other) hand with it saying,
     'This (pledge of allegiance) is on the behalf of
     'Uthman.' Then Ibn 'Umar said to the man, 'Bear
     (these) excuses in mind with you.' 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 49: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet ascended the mountain of Uhud and
     Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman were
     accompanying him. The mountain gave a shake
     (i.e. trembled underneath them) . The Prophet
     said, "O Uhud ! Be calm." I think that the
     Prophet hit it with his foot, adding, "For upon
     you there are none but a Prophet, a Siddiq and
     two martyrs." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 50: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun: 

     I saw 'Umar bin Al-Khattab a few days before
     he was stabbed in Medina. He was standing with
     Hudhaifa bin Al-Yaman and 'Uthman bin Hunaif
     to whom he said, "What have you done? Do you
     think that you have imposed more taxation on the
     land (of As-Swad i.e. 'Iraq) than it can bear?"
     They replied, "We have imposed on it what it can
     bear because of its great yield." 'Umar again said,
     "Check whether you have imposed on the land
     what it can not bear." They said, "No, (we
     haven't)." 'Umar added, "If Allah should keep me
     alive I will let the widows of Iraq need no men to
     support them after me." But only four days had
     elapsed when he was stabbed (to death ). The
     day he was stabbed, I was standing and there
     was nobody between me and him (i.e. Umar)
     except Abdullah bin 'Abbas. Whenever Umar
     passed between the two rows, he would say,
     "Stand in straight lines." 

     When he saw no defect (in the rows), he would
     go forward and start the prayer with Takbir. He
     would recite Surat Yusuf or An-Nahl or the like
     in the first Rak'a so that the people may have the
     time to Join the prayer. As soon as he said
     Takbir, I heard him saying, "The dog has killed
     or eaten me," at the time he (i.e. the murderer)
     stabbed him. A non-Arab infidel proceeded on
     carrying a double-edged knife and stabbing all
     the persons he passed by on the right and left
     (till) he stabbed thirteen persons out of whom
     seven died. When one of the Muslims saw that,
     he threw a cloak on him. Realizing that he had
     been captured, the non-Arab infidel killed
     himself, 'Umar held the hand of 'Abdur-Rahman
     bin Auf and let him lead the prayer. 

     Those who were standing by the side of 'Umar
     saw what I saw, but the people who were in the
     other parts of the Mosque did not see anything,
     but they lost the voice of 'Umar and they were
     saying, "Subhan Allah! Subhan Allah! (i.e.
     Glorified be Allah)." Abdur-Rahman bin Auf led
     the people a short prayer. When they finished the
     prayer, 'Umar said, "O Ibn 'Abbas! Find out
     who attacked me." Ibn 'Abbas kept on looking
     here and there for a short time and came to say.
     "The slave of Al Mughira." On that 'Umar said,
     "The craftsman?" Ibn 'Abbas said, "Yes." 'Umar
     said, "May Allah curse him. I did not treat him
     unjustly. All the Praises are for Allah Who has
     not caused me to die at the hand of a man who
     claims himself to be a Muslim. No doubt, you
     and your father (Abbas) used to love to have
     more non-Arab infidels in Medina." Al-Abbas
     had the greatest number of slaves. Ibn 'Abbas
     said to 'Umar. "If you wish, we will do." He
     meant, "If you wish we will kill them." 'Umar
     said, "You are mistaken (for you can't kill them)
     after they have spoken your language, prayed
     towards your Qibla, and performed Hajj like
     yours." 

     Then Umar was carried to his house, and we
     went along with him, and the people were as if
     they had never suffered a calamity before. Some
     said, "Do not worry (he will be Alright soon)."
     Some said, "We are afraid (that he will die)."
     Then an infusion of dates was brought to him and
     he drank it but it came out (of the wound) of his
     belly. Then milk was brought to him and he
     drank it, and it also came out of his belly. The
     people realized that he would die. We went to
     him, and the people came, praising him. A young
     man came saying, "O chief of the believers!
     Receive the glad tidings from Allah to you due to
     your company with Allah's Apostle and your
     superiority in Islam which you know. Then you
     became the ruler (i.e. Caliph) and you ruled with
     justice and finally you have been martyred."
     'Umar said, "I wish that all these privileges will
     counterbalance (my shortcomings) so that I will
     neither lose nor gain anything." 

     When the young man turned back to leave, his
     clothes seemed to be touching the ground. 'Umar
     said, "Call the young man back to me." (When he
     came back) 'Umar said, "O son of my brother!
     Lift your clothes, for this will keep your clothes
     clean and save you from the Punishment of your
     Lord." 'Umar further said, "O 'Abdullah bin
     'Umar! See how much I am in debt to others."
     When the debt was checked, it amounted to
     approximately eighty-six thousand. 'Umar said,
     "If the property of 'Umar's family covers the
     debt, then pay the debt thereof; otherwise
     request it from Bani 'Adi bin Ka'b, and if that too
     is not sufficient, ask for it from Quraish tribe, and
     do not ask for it from any one else, and pay this
     debt on my behalf." 

     'Umar then said (to 'Abdullah), "Go to 'Aisha
     (the mother of the believers) and say: "Umar is
     paying his salutation to you. But don't say: 'The
     chief of the believers,' because today I am not
     the chief of the believers. And say: "Umar bin
     Al-Khattab asks the permission to be buried with
     his two companions (i.e. the Prophet, and Abu
     Bakr)." Abdullah greeted 'Aisha and asked for
     the permission for entering, and then entered to
     her and found her sitting and weeping. He said to
     her, "'Umar bin Al-Khattab is paying his
     salutations to you, and asks the permission to be
     buried with his two companions." She said, "I
     had the idea of having this place for myself, but
     today I prefer Umar to myself." When he
     returned it was said (to 'Umar), "'Abdullah bin
     'Umar has come." 'Umar said, "Make me sit up."
     Somebody supported him against his body and
     'Umar asked ('Abdullah), "What news do you
     have?" He said, "O chief of the believers! It is as
     you wish. She has given the permission." 'Umar
     said, "Praise be to Allah, there was nothing more
     important to me than this. So when I die, take
     me, and greet 'Aisha and say: "Umar bin
     Al-Khattab asks the permission (to be buried
     with the Prophet ), and if she gives the
     permission, bury me there, and if she refuses,
     then take me to the grave-yard of the Muslims." 

     Then Hafsa (the mother of the believers) came
     with many other women walking with her. When
     we saw her, we went away. She went in (to
     'Umar) and wept there for sometime. When the
     men asked for permission to enter, she went into
     another place, and we heard her weeping inside.
     The people said (to 'Umar), "O chief of the
     believers! Appoint a successor." Umar said, "I
     do not find anyone more suitable for the job than
     the following persons or group whom Allah's
     Apostle had been pleased with before he died."
     Then 'Umar mentioned 'Ali, 'Uthman, AzZubair,
     Talha, Sad and 'Abdur-Rahman (bin Auf) and
     said, "Abdullah bin 'Umar will be a witness to
     you, but he will have no share in the rule. His
     being a witness will compensate him for not
     sharing the right of ruling. If Sad becomes the
     ruler, it will be alright: otherwise, whoever
     becomes the ruler should seek his help, as I have
     not dismissed him because of disability or
     dishonesty." 'Umar added, "I recommend that my
     successor takes care of the early emigrants; to
     know their rights and protect their honor and
     sacred things. 

     I also recommend that he be kind to the Ansar
     who had lived in Medina before the emigrants
     and Belief had entered their hearts before them. I
     recommend that the (ruler) should accept the
     good of the righteous among them and excuse
     their wrong-doers, and I recommend that he
     should do good to all the people of the towns
     (Al-Ansar), as they are the protectors of Islam
     and the source of wealth and the source of
     annoyance to the enemy. I also recommend that
     nothing be taken from them except from their
     surplus with their consent. I also recommend that
     he do good to the 'Arab bedouin, as they are the
     origin of the 'Arabs and the material of Islam. He
     should take from what is inferior, amongst their
     properties and distribute that to the poor
     amongst them. I also recommend him concerning
     Allah's and His Apostle's protectees (i.e.
     Dhimmis) to fulfill their contracts and to fight for
     them and not to overburden them with what is
     beyond their ability." So when 'Umar expired, we
     carried him out and set out walking. 'Abdullah
     bin 'Umar greeted ('Aisha) and said, "'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab asks for the permission." 'Aisha said,
     "Bring him in." He was brought in and buried
     beside his two companions. 

     When he was buried, the group (recommended
     by 'Umar) held a meeting. Then 'Abdur-Rahman
     said, " Reduce the candidates for rulership to
     three of you." Az-Zubair said, "I give up my right
     to Ali." Talha said, "I give up my right to
     'Uthman," Sad, 'I give up my right to
     'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf." 'Abdur-Rahman then
     said (to 'Uthman and 'Ali), "Now which of you is
     willing to give up his right of candidacy to that he
     may choose the better of the (remaining) two,
     bearing in mind that Allah and Islam will be his
     witnesses." So both the sheiks (i.e. 'Uthman and
     'Ali) kept silent. 'Abdur-Rahman said, "Will you
     both leave this matter to me, and I take Allah as
     my Witness that I will not choose but the better
     of you?" They said, "Yes." So 'Abdur-Rahman
     took the hand of one of them (i.e. 'Ali) and said,
     "You are related to Allah's Apostle and one of
     the earliest Muslims as you know well. So I ask
     you by Allah to promise that if I select you as a
     ruler you will do justice, and if I select 'Uthman
     as a ruler you will listen to him and obey him."
     Then he took the other (i.e. 'Uthman) aside and
     said the same to him. When 'Abdur-Rahman
     secured (their agreement to) this covenant, he
     said, "O 'Uthman! Raise your hand." So he (i.e.
     'Abdur-Rahman) gave him (i.e. 'Uthman) the
     solemn pledge, and then 'Ali gave him the pledge
     of allegiance and then all the (Medina) people
     gave him the pledge of allegiance. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 51: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Tomorrow I will give the
     flag to a man with whose leadership Allah will
     grant (the Muslim) victory." So the people kept
     on thinking the whole night as to who would be
     given the flag. The next morning the people went
     to Allah's Apostle and every one of them hoped
     that he would be given the flag. The Prophet
     said, "Where is Ali bin Abi Talib?" The people
     replied, "He is suffering from eye trouble, O
     Allah's Apostle." He said, "Send for him and
     bring him to me." So when 'Ali came, the
     Prophet spat in his eyes and invoked good on
     him, and he became alright as if he had no
     ailment. The Prophet then gave him the flag. 'Ali
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I fight them (i.e.
     enemy) till they become like us?" The Prophet
     said, "Proceed to them steadily till you approach
     near to them and then invite them to Islam and
     inform them of their duties towards Allah which
     Islam prescribes for them, for by Allah, if one
     man is guided on the right path (i.e. converted to
     Islam) through you, it would be better for you
     than (a great number of) red camels." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 52: 

     Narrated Salama: 

     Ali happened to stay behind the Prophet and (did
     not join him) during the battle of Khaibar for he
     was having eye trouble. Then he said, "How
     could I remain behind Allah's Apostle?" So 'Ali
     set out following the Prophet , When it was the
     eve of the day in the morning of which Allah
     helped (the Muslims) to conquer it, Allah's
     Apostle said, "I will give the flag (to a man), or
     tomorrow a man whom Allah and His Apostle
     love will take the flag," or said, "A man who
     loves Allah and His Apostle; and Allah will grant
     victory under his leadership." Suddenly came 'Ali
     whom we did not expect. The people said, "This
     is 'Ali." Allah's Apostle gave him the flag and
     Allah granted victory under his leadership. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 53: 

     Narrated Abu Hazim: 

     A man came to Sahl bin Sad and said, "This is
     so-and-so," meaning the Governor of Medina,
     "He is calling 'Ali bad names near the pulpit."
     Sahl asked, "What is he saying?" He (i.e. the
     man) replied, "He calls him (i.e. 'Ali) Abu Turab."
     Sahl laughed and said, "By Allah, none but the
     Prophet called him by this name and no name
     was dearer to 'Ali than this." So I asked Sahl to
     tell me more, saying, "O Abu 'Abbas! How (was
     this name given to 'Ali)?" Sahl said, "'Ali went to
     Fatima and then came out and slept in the
     Mosque. The Prophet asked Fatima, "Where is
     your cousin?" She said, "In the Mosque." The
     Prophet went to him and found that his (i.e. Ali's)
     covering sheet had slipped of his back and dust
     had soiled his back. The Prophet started wiping
     the dust off his back and said twice, "Get up! O
     Abu Turab (i.e. O. man with the dust)." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 54: 

     Narrated Sad bin 'Ubaida: 

     A man came to Ibn 'Umar and asked about
     'Uthman and Ibn 'Umar mentioned his good
     deeds and said to the questioner. "Perhaps these
     facts annoy you?" The other said, "Yes." Ibn
     'Umar said, "May Allah stick your nose in the
     dust (i.e. degrade you)!' Then the man asked him
     about 'Ali. Ibn 'Umar mentioned his good deeds
     and said, "It is all true, and that is his house in the
     midst of the houses of the Prophet. Perhaps
     these facts have hurt you?" The questioner said,
     "Yes." Ibn 'Umar said, "May Allah stick your
     nose in the dust (i.e. degrade you or make you
     do things which you hate) ! Go away and do
     whatever you can against me." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 55: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     Fatima complained of the suffering caused to her
     by the hand mill. Some Captives were brought to
     the Prophet, she came to him but did not find him
     at home 'Aisha was present there to whom she
     told (of her desire for a servant). When the
     Prophet came, Aisha informed him about
     Fatima's visit. Ali added "So the Prophet came to
     us, while we had gone to our bed I wanted to get
     up but the Prophet said, "Remain at your place".
     Then he sat down between us till I found the
     coolness of his feet on my chest. Then he said,
     "Shall I teach you a thing which is better than
     what you have asked me? When you go to bed,
     say, 'Allahu-Akbar' thirty-four times, and
     'Subhan Allah thirty-three times, and
     'Alhamdu-lillah thirty-three times for that is better
     for you both than a servant." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 56: 

     Narrated Ubaida: 

     Ali said (to the people of 'Iraq), "Judge as you
     used to judge, for I hate differences (and I do my
     best ) till the people unite as one group, or I die
     as my companions have died." And narrated Sad
     that the Prophet said to 'Ali, "Will you not be
     pleased from this that you are to me like Aaron
     was to Moses?" 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 57: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The people used to say, "Abu Huraira narrates
     too many narrations." In fact I used to keep close
     to Allah's Apostle and was satisfied with what
     filled my stomach. I ate no leavened bread and
     dressed no decorated striped clothes, and never
     did a man or a woman serve me, and I often
     used to press my belly against gravel because of
     hunger, and I used to ask a man to recite a
     Quranic Verse to me although I knew it, so that
     he would take me to his home and feed me. And
     the most generous of all the people to the poor
     was Ja'far bin Abi Talib. He used to take us to
     his home and offer us what was available therein.
     He would even offer us an empty folded leather
     container (of butter) which we would split and
     lick whatever was in it. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 58: 

     Narrated Ash-Sha'bi: 

     Whenever Ibn 'Umar greeted Ibn Jafar, he used
     to say: "As-salamu-'Alaika (i.e. Peace be on
     you) O son of Dhu-l-Janahain (son of the
     two-winged person)." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 59: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Whenever there was drought, 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab used to ask Allah for rain through
     Al'Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib, saying, "O Allah!
     We used to request our Prophet to ask You for
     rain, and You would give us. Now we request
     the uncle of our Prophet to ask You for rain, so
     give us rain." And they would be given rain." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 60: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Fatima sent somebody to Abu Bakr asking him
     to give her her inheritance from the Prophet from
     what Allah had given to His Apostle through Fai
     (i.e. booty gained without fighting). She asked for
     the Sadaqa (i.e. wealth assigned for charitable
     purposes) of the Prophet at Medina, and Fadak,
     and what remained of the Khumus (i.e., one-fifth)
     of the Khaibar booty. Abu Bakr said, "Allah's
     Apostle said, 'We (Prophets), our property is not
     inherited, and whatever we leave is Sadaqa, but
     Muhammad's Family can eat from this property,
     i.e. Allah's property, but they have no right to
     take more than the food they need.' By Allah! I
     will not bring any change in dealing with the
     Sadaqa of the Prophet (and will keep them) as
     they used to be observed in his (i.e. the
     Prophet's) life-time, and I will dispose with it as
     Allah's Apostle used to do," Then 'Ali said, "I
     testify that None has the right to be worshipped
     but Allah, and that Muhammad is His Apostle,"
     and added, "O Abu Bakr! We acknowledge
     your superiority." Then he (i.e. 'Ali) mentioned
     their own relationship to Allah's Apostle and their
     right. Abu Bakr then spoke saying, "By Allah in
     Whose Hands my life is. I love to do good to the
     relatives of Allah's Apostle rather than to my own
     relatives" Abu Bark added: Look at Muhammad
     through his family (i.e. if you are no good to his
     family you are not good to him). 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 61: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Fatima is a part of me, and
     he who makes her angry, makes me angry." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 62: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet called his daughter Fatima during his
     illness in which he died, and told her a secret
     whereupon she wept. Then he called her again
     and told her a secret whereupon she laughed.
     When I asked her about that, she replied, "The
     Prophet spoke to me in secret and informed me
     that he would die in the course of the illness
     during which he died, so I wept. He again spoke
     to me in secret and informed me that I would be
     the first of his family to follow him (after his
     death) and on that I laughed." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 63: 

     Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam: 

     'Uthman bin 'Affan was afflicted with severe
     nose-bleeding in the year when such illness was
     prevelant and that prevented him from
     performing Hajj, and (because of it) he made his
     will. A man from Quraish came to him and said,
     "Appoint your successor." 'Uthman asked, "Did
     the people name him? (i.e. the successor) the
     man said, "Yes." Uthman asked, "Who is that?"
     The man remained silent. Another man came to
     'Uthman and I think it was Al-Harith. He also
     said, "Appoint your successor." 'Uthman asked,
     "Did the people name him?" The man replied
     "Yes." 'Uthman said, "Who is that?" The man
     remained silent. 'Uthman said, "Perhaps they
     have mentioned Az-Zubair?" The man said,
     "Yes." 'Uthman said, "By Him in Whose Hands
     my life is, he is the best of them as I know, and
     the dearest of them to Allah's Apostle ." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 64: 

     Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam: 

     While I was with 'Uthman, a man came to him
     and said, "Appoint your successor." 'Uthman
     said, "Has such successor been named?" He
     replied, "Yes, Az-Zubair." 'Uthman said, thrice,
     "By Allah! Indeed you know that he is the best of
     you." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 65: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet said, "Every prophet used to have a
     Hawari (i.e. disciple), and my Hawari is
     Az-Zubair bin Al-'Awwam." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 66: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair: 

     During the battle of Al-Ahzab, I and 'Umar bin
     Abi-Salama were kept behind with the women.
     Behold! I saw (my father) Az-Zubair riding his
     horse, going to and coming from Bani Quraiza
     twice or thrice. So when I came back I said, "O
     my father! I saw you going to and coming from
     Bani Quraiza?" He said, "Did you really see me,
     O my son?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Allah's
     Apostle said, 'Who will go to Bani Quraiza and
     bring me their news?' So I went, and when I
     came back, Allah's Apostle mentioned for me
     both his parents saying, "Let my father and
     mother be sacrificed for you."' 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 67: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     On the day of the battle of Al-Yarmuk, the
     companions of the Prophet said to Az-Zubair,
     "Will you attack the enemy vigorously so that we
     may attack them along with you?" So Az-Zubair
     attacked them, and they inflicted two wounds
     over his shoulder, and in between these two
     wounds there was an old scar he had received
     on the day of the battle of Badr When I was a
     child, I used to insert my fingers into those scars
     in play. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 68: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     "Before the Prophet died, he was pleased with
     him (Talha bin 'Ubaidullah)." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 69: 

     Narrated Abu 'Uthman: 

     During one of the Ghazawat in which Allah's
     Apostle was fighting, none remained with the
     Prophet but Talha and Sad. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 70: 

     Narrated Qais bin Abi Hazim: 

     I saw Talha's paralyzed hand with which he had
     protected the Prophet (from an arrow) . 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 71: 

     Narrated Sad: On the day of the battle of Uhud
     the Prophet mentioned for me both hi 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 72: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     No doubt, (for some time) I stood for one-third
     of the Muslims. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 73: 

     Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas: 

     No man embraced Islam before the day on
     which I embraced Islam, and no doubt, I
     remained for seven days as one third of the then
     extant Muslims. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 74: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     I heard Sad saying, "I was the first amongst the
     'Arabs who shot an arrow for Allah's Cause. We
     used to fight along with the Prophets, while we
     had nothing to eat except the leaves of trees so
     that one's excrete would look like the excrete
     balls of camel or a sheep, containing nothing to
     mix them together. Today Banu Asad tribe blame
     me for not having understood Islam. I would be a
     loser if my deeds were in vain." Those people
     complained about Sad to 'Umar, claiming that he
     did not offer his prayers perfectly. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 75: 

     Narrated about the sons-in-law of the Prophet
     and one of them is Abu Al-'As bin Ar-Rabi'. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 76: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama: 

     'Ali demanded the hand of the daughter of Abu
     Jahl. Fatima heard of this and went to Allah's
     Apostle saying, "Your people think that you do
     not become angry for the sake of your daughters
     as 'Ali is now going to marry the daughter of Abu
     Jahl. "On that Allah's Apostle got up and after his
     recitation of Tashah-hud. I heard him saying,
     "Then after! I married one of my daughters to
     Abu Al-'As bin Al-Rabi' (the husband of Zainab,
     the daughter of the Prophet ) before Islam and he
     proved truthful in whatever he said to me. No
     doubt, Fatima is a part of me, I hate to see her
     being troubled. By Allah, the daughter of Allah's
     Apostle and the daughter of Allah's Enemy
     cannot be the wives of one man." So 'Ali gave up
     that engagement. 

     'Al-Miswar further said: I heard the Prophet
     talking and he mentioned a son-in-law of his
     belonging to the tribe of Bani 'Abd-Shams. He
     highly praised him concerning that relationship
     and said (whenever) he spoke to me, he spoke
     the truth, and whenever he promised me, he
     fulfilled his promise." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 77: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet sent an army under the command of
     Usama bin Zaid. When some people criticized
     his leadership, the Prophet said, "If you are
     criticizing Usama's leadership, you used to
     criticize his father's leadership before. By Allah!
     He was worthy of leadership and was one of the
     dearest persons to me, and (now) this (i.e.
     Usama) is one of the dearest to me after him (i.e.
     Zaid)." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 78: 

     Narrated Urwa: 

     Aisha said, "A Qaif (i.e. one skilled in recognizing
     the lineage of a person through Physiognomy and
     through examining the body parts of an infant)
     came to me while the Prophet was present, and
     Usama bin Zaid and Zaid bin Haritha were Lying
     asleep. The Qa'if said. These feet (of Usama and
     his father) are of persons belonging to the same
     lineage.' " The Prophet was pleased with that
     saying which won his admiration, and he told
     'Aisha of it. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 79: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The people of the Quraish tribe were worried
     about the Makhzumiya woman. They said.
     "Nobody dare speak to him (i.e. the Prophet )
     except Usama bin Zaid as he is the most beloved
     to Allah's Apostle." Aisha said, "A woman from
     Bani Makhzumiya committed a theft and the
     people said, 'Who can intercede with the
     Prophet for her?' So nobody dared speak to him
     (i.e. the Prophet) but Usama bin Zaid spoke to
     him. The Prophet said, 'If a reputable man
     amongst the children of Bani Israel committed a
     theft, they used to forgive him, but if a poor man
     committed a theft, they would cut his hand. But I
     would cut even the hand of Fatima (i.e. the
     daughter of the Prophet) if she committed a
     theft." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 80: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar: 

     One day Ibn 'Umar, while in the Mosque, looked
     at a man who was dragging his clothes while
     walking in one of the corners of the Mosque He
     said, "See who is that. I wish he was near to me."
     Somebody then said (to Ibn 'Umar), "Don't you
     know him, O Abu 'Abdur-Rahman? He is
     Muhammad bin Usama." On that Ibn 'Umar
     bowed his head and dug the earth with his hands
     and then, said, "If Allah's Apostle saw him, he
     would have loved him." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 81: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     That the Prophet used to take him (i.e. Usama)
     and Al-Hassan (in his lap) and say: "O Allah!
     Love them, as I love them." The freed slave of
     Usama bin Zaid said, "Al-Hajjaj bin Aiman bin
     Um Aiman and Aiman Ibn Um Aiman was
     Usama's brother from the maternal side, and he
     was one of the Ansar. He was seen by Ibn
     'Umar not performing his bowing and
     prostrations in a perfect manner. So Ibn 'Umar
     told him to repeat his prayer. Harmala, the freed
     slave of Usama bin Zaid said that while he was in
     the company of 'Abdullah bin 'Umar, Al-Hajjaj
     bin Aiman came in and (while praying) he did not
     perform his bowing and prostrations properly.
     So Ibn 'Umar told him to repeat his prayer.
     When he went away, Ibn 'Umar asked me,
     "Who is he?" I said, "Al-Hajjaj bin Um Aiman."
     Ibn 'Umar said, "If Allah's Apostle saw him, he
     would have loved him." Then Ibn 'Umar
     mentioned the love of the Prophet for the
     children of Um Aimn. Sulaiman said that Um
     Aiman was one of the nurses of the Prophet. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 82: 

     The merits of 'Abdullah bin Umar bin
     Al-Khattab. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 83: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     If a man saw a dream during the lifetime of the
     Prophet he would narrate it to the Prophet. Once
     I wished to see a dream and narrate it to the
     Prophet I was young, unmarried, and used to
     sleep in the Mosque during the lifetime of the
     Prophet. I dreamt that two angels took me and
     went away with me towards the (Hell) Fire which
     looked like a well with the inside walls built up,
     and had two side-walls like those of a well.
     There I saw some people in it whom I knew. I
     started saying, "I seek Refuge with Allah from the
     (Hell) Fire, I seek Refuge with Allah from the
     (Hell) Fire." Then another angel met the other
     two and said to me, "Do not be afraid." I
     narrated my dream to Hafsa who, in her turn,
     narrated it to the Prophet. He said, "What an
     excellent man Abdullah is if he only observes the
     night prayer." (Salem, a sub-narrator said,
     "Abdullah used not to sleep at night but very little
     hence forward." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 84: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar from Hafsa his sister: 

     That the Prophet had said to her, "'Abdullah is a
     pious man." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 85: 

     Narrated 'Alqama: 

     I went to Sham and offered a two-Rak'at prayer
     and then said, "O Allah! Bless me with a good
     pious companion." So I went to some people
     and sat with them. An old man came and sat by
     my side. I asked, "Who is he?" They replied,
     "(He is) Abu-Ad-Darda.' I said (to him), "I
     prayed to Allah to bless me with a pious
     companion and He sent you to me." He asked
     me, "From where are you?" I replied, "From the
     people of Al-Kufa." He said, "Isn't there amongst
     you Ibn Um 'Abd, the one who used to carry the
     shoes, the cushion(or pillow) and the water for
     ablution? Is there amongst you the one whom
     Allah gave Refuge from Satan through the
     request of His Prophet. Is there amongst you the
     one who keeps the secrets of the Prophet which
     nobody knows except him?" Abu Darda further
     asked, "How does 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) recite
     the Sura starting with, 'By the Night as it
     conceals (the light)." (92.1) Then I recited before
     him: 

     'By the Night as it envelops: And by the Day as it
     appears in brightness; And by male and female.'
     (91.1-3) On this Abu Ad-Darda' said, "By Allah,
     the Prophet made me recite the Sura in this way
     while I was listening to him (reciting it)." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 86: 

     Narrated Ibrahim: 'Alqama went to Sham and
     when he entered the mosque, he said, "O Allah !
     Bless me with a pious companion." So he sat
     with Abu Ad-Darda. Abu Ad-Darda' asked him,
     "Where are you from?" 'Alqama replied, "From
     the people of Kufa." Abu Ad 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 87: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said, " Every nation has an
     extremely trustworthy man, and the trustworthy
     man of this (i.e. Muslim) nation is Abu 'Ubaida
     bin Al-Jarrah." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 88: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     The Prophet said to the people of Nijran, "I will
     send you the most trustworthy man." (Every one
     of) the companions of the Prophet was looking
     forward (to be that person). He then sent Abu
     'Ubaida. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 89: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     I heard the Prophet talking at the pulpit while
     Al-Hasan was sitting beside him, and he (i.e. the
     Prophet ) was once looking at the people and at
     another time Al-Hasan, and saying, "This son of
     mine is a Saiyid (i.e. chief) and perhaps Allah will
     bring about an agreement between two sects of
     the Muslims through him." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 90: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     That the Prophet used to take him and Al-Hasan,
     and used to say, "O Allah! I love them, so please
     love them," or said something similar. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 91: 

     Narrated Muhammad: 

     Anas bin Malik said, "The head of Al-Husain
     was brought to 'Ubaidullah bin Ziyad and was
     put in a tray, and then Ibn Ziyad started playing
     with a stick at the nose and mouth of Al-Husain's
     head and saying something about his handsome
     features." Anas then said (to him), "Al-Husain
     resembled the Prophet more than the others did."
     Anas added, "His (i.e. Al-Husain's) hair was
     dyed with Wasma (i.e. a kind of plant used as a
     dye)." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 92: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     I saw the Prophet carrying Al-Hasan on his
     shoulder an saying, "O Allah! I love him, so
     please love him." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 93: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith: 

     I saw Abu Bakr carrying Al-Hasan and saying,
     "Let my father be sacrificed for you; you
     resemble the Prophet and not 'Ali," while 'Ali
     was laughing at this. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 94: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Abu Bakr used to say, "Please Muhammad (i.e.
     the Prophet) by doing good to his family." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 95: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     None resembled the Prophet more than
     Al-Hasan bin 'Ali did. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 96: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Nu'm: 

     A person asked 'Abdullah bin 'Umar whether a
     Muslim could kill flies. I heard him saying (in
     reply). "The people of Iraq are asking about the
     killing of flies while they themselves murdered the
     son of the daughter of Allah's Apostle . The
     Prophet said, They (i.e. Hasan and Husain) are
     my two sweet basils in this world." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 97: 

     Narrated the merits of Bilal bin Rabah the freed
     slave of Abu Bakr. The Prophet said (to Bilal), "I
     heard the sound of your shoes in Paradise just in
     front of me." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 98: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Umar used to say, "Abu Bakr is our chief, and he
     manumitted our chief," meaning Bilal. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 99: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     Bilal said to Abu Bakr, "If you have bought me
     for yourself then keep me (for yourself), but if
     you have bought me for Allah's Sake, then leave
     me for Allah's Work." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 100: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Once the Prophet embraced me (pressed me to
     his chest) and said, "O Allah, teach him wisdom
     (i.e. the understanding of the knowledge of
     Qur'an)." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 101r: 

     Narrated 'Abdul Warith: 

     The same but said, "O Allah, teach him (Ibn
     Abbas) the Book (i.e. the understanding of the
     knowledge of Qur'an)." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 101a: 

     Narrated Khalid: 

     As above. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 102: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet had informed the people about the
     death of Zaid, Ja'far and Ibn Rawaha before the
     news of their death reached them. He said with
     his eyes flowing with tears, "Zaid took the flag
     and was martyred; then Ja'far took the flag and
     was martyred, and then Ibn Rawaha took the
     flag and was martyred. Finally the flag was taken
     by one of Allah's Swords (i.e. Khalid bin
     Al-Walid) and Allah gave them (i.e. the Muslims)
     victory." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 103: 

     Narrated Masruq: 

     'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) was mentioned before
     'Abdullah bin 'Amr. The latter said, "That is a
     man I continue to love because I heard Allah's
     Apostle saying, ' Learn the recitation of the
     Qur'an from (any of these) four persons:
     'Abdullah bin Masud, Salim the freed slave of
     Abu Hudhaifa, Ubai bin Kab, and Muadh bin
     Jabal." I do not remember whether he mentioned
     Ubai first or Muadh. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 104: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     Allah's Apostle neither talked in an insulting
     manner nor did he ever speak evil intentionally.
     He used to say, "The most beloved to me
     amongst you is the one who has the best
     character and manners." He added, " Learn the
     Qur'an from (any of these) four persons.
     'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, Salim the freed slave of
     Abu Hudhaifa, Ubai bin Ka'b, and Mu'adh bin
     Jabal." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 105: 

     Narrated Alqama: 

     I went to Sham and was offering a two-Rak'at
     prayer; I said, "O Allah! Bless me with a (pious)
     companion." Then I saw an old man coming
     towards me, and when he came near I said, (to
     myself), "I hope Allah has given me my request."
     The man asked (me), "Where are you from?" I
     replied, "I am from the people of Kufa." He said,
     "Weren't there amongst you the Carrier of the
     (Prophet's) shoes, Siwak and the ablution water
     container? Weren't there amongst you the man
     who was given Allah's Refuge from the Satan?
     And weren't there amongst you the man who
     used to keep the (Prophet's) secrets which
     nobody else knew? How did Ibn Um 'Abd (i.e.
     'Abdullah bin Mas'ud) use to recite Surat-al-lail
     (the Night:92)?" I recited:-- 

     "By the Night as it envelops By the Day as it
     appears in brightness. And by male and female."
     (92.1-3) On that, Abu Darda said, "By Allah, the
     Prophet made me read the Verse in this way
     after listening to him, but these people (of Sham)
     tried their best to let me say something different." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 106: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid: 

     We asked Hudhaifa to tell us of a person
     resembling (to some extent) the Prophet in good
     appearance and straight forward behavior so that
     we may learn from him (good manners and
     acceptable conduct). Hudhaifa replied, "I do not
     know anybody resembling the Prophet (to some
     extent) in appearance and conduct more than Ibn
     Um 'Abd. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 107: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari: 

     My brother and I came from Yemen, and for
     some time we continued to consider 'Abdullah
     bin Mas'ud as one of the members of the family
     of the Prophet because we used to see him and
     his mother going in the house of the Prophet very
     often. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 108: 

     Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika: 

     Muawiya offered one Rak'a Witr prayer after the
     'Isha prayer, and at that time a freed slave of Ibn
     'Abbas was present. He (i.e. the slave) went to
     Ibn 'Abbas (and told him that Muawiya offered
     one Rak'a Witr prayer). Ibn Abbas said, "Leave
     him, for he was in the company of Allah's
     Apostle." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 109: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika: 

     Somebody said to Ibn 'Abbas, "Can you speak
     to the chief of the believers Muwaiya, as he does
     not pray except one Rak'a as Witr?" Ibn 'Abbas
     replied, "He is a Faqih (i.e. a learned man who
     can give religious verdicts) ." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 110: 

     Narrated Humran bin Abbas: 

     Muawiya said (to the people), "You offer a
     prayer which we, who were the companions of
     the Prophet never saw the Prophet offering, and
     he forbade its offering," i.e. the two Rakat after
     the compulsory 'Asr prayer. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 111: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Fatima is a part of me, and
     whoever makes her angry, makes me angry." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 112: 

     Narrated Abu Salama: 

     'Aisha said, "Once Allah's Apostle said (to me),
     'O Aish ('Aisha)! This is Gabriel greeting you.' I
     said, 'Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be
     on him, you see what I don't see' " She was
     addressing Allah 's Apostle. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 113: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Many amongst men
     attained perfection but amongst women none
     attained the perfection except Mary, the daughter
     of Imran and Asiya, the wife of Pharaoh. And the
     superiority of 'Aisha to other women is like the
     superiority of Tharid (i.e. an Arabic dish) to other
     meals." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 114: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The superiority of 'Aisha
     over other women is like the superiority of Tharid
     to other meals." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 115: 

     Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad: 

     Once 'Aisha became sick and Ibn 'Abbas went
     to see her and said, "O mother of the believers!
     You are leaving for truthful fore-runners i.e. for
     Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr. 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 116: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     When 'Ali sent 'Ammar and Al-Hasan to (the
     people of) Kufa to urge them to fight, 'Ammar
     addressed them saying, "I know that she (i.e.
     'Aisha) is the wife of the Prophet in this world
     and in the Hereafter (world to come), but Allah
     has put you to test, whether you will follow Him
     (i.e. Allah) or her." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 117: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     That she borrowed a necklace from Asma' and it
     was lost. Allah's Apostle sent some of his
     companions to look for it. During their journey
     the time of prayer was due and they prayed
     without ablution. When they returned to the
     Prophet they complained about it. So the Divine
     Verse of Tayammum was revealed. Usaid bin
     Hudair said (to 'Aisha), "May Allah reward you
     handsomely. By Allah, whenever you have a
     difficulty, Allah took you out of it and brought
     with it, a Blessing for the Muslims." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 118: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     When Allah's Apostle was in his fatal illness, he
     started visiting his wives and saying, "Where will
     I be tomorrow?" He was anxious to be in
     'Aisha's home. 'Aisha said, "So when it was my
     day, the Prophet became silent (no longer asked
     the question)." 


Volume 5, Book 57, Number 119: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     The people used to send presents to the Prophet
     on the day of 'Aisha's turn. 'Aisha said, "My
     companions (i.e. the other wives of the Prophet)
     gathered in the house of Um Salama and said, "0
     Um Salama! By Allah, the people choose to
     send presents on the day of 'Aisha's turn and we
     too, love the good (i.e. presents etc.) as 'Aisha
     does. You should tell Allah's Apostle to tell the
     people to send their presents to him wherever he
     may be, or wherever his turn may be." Um
     Salama said that to the Prophet and he turned
     away from her, and when the Prophet returned
     to her (i.e. Um Salama), she repeated the same,
     and the Prophet again turned away, and when
     she told him the same for the third time, the
     Prophet said, "O Um Salama! Don't trouble me
     by harming 'Aisha, for by Allah, the Divine
     Inspiration never came to me while I was under
     the blanket of any woman amongst you except
     her." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 58: 

    Merits of the Helpers in
        Madinah (Ansaar) 



Volume 5, Book 58, Number 120: 

     Narrated Ghailan bin Jarir: 

     I asked Anas, "Tell me about the name
     'Al-Ansar.; Did you call yourselves by it or did
     Allah call you by it?" He said, "Allah called us by
     it." We used to visit Anas (at Basra) and he used
     to narrate to us the virtues and deeds of the
     Ansar, and he used to address me or a person
     from the tribe of Al-Azd and say, "Your tribe did
     so-and-so on such-and-such a day." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 121: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The day of Bu'ath (i.e. Day of fighting between
     the two tribes of the Ansar, the Aus and
     Khazraj) was brought about by Allah for the
     good of His Apostle so that when Allah's
     Apostle reached (Medina), the tribes of Medina
     had already divided and their chiefs had been
     killed and wounded. So Allah had brought about
     the battle for the good of H is Apostle in order
     that they (i.e. the Ansar) might embrace Islam. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 122: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     On the day of the Conquest of Mecca, when the
     Prophet had given (from the booty) the Quraish,
     the Ansar said, "By Allah, this is indeed very
     strange: While our swords are still dribbling with
     the blood of Quraish, our war booty are
     distributed amongst them." When this news
     reached the Prophet he called the Ansar and
     said, "What is this news that has reached me
     from you?" They used not to tell lies, so they
     replied, "What has reached you is true." He said,
     "Doesn't it please you that the people take the
     booty to their homes and you take Allah's
     Apostle to your homes? If the Ansar took their
     way through a valley or a mountain pass, I would
     take the Ansar's valley or a mountain pass." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 123: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet or Abul-Qasim said, "If the Ansar
     took their way through a valley or a mountain
     pass, I would take Ansar's valley. And but for
     the migration, I would have been one of the
     Ansar." Abu Huraira used to say, "The Prophet
     is not unjust (by saying so). May my parents be
     sacrificed for him, for the Ansar sheltered and
     helped him," or said a similar sentence. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 124: 

     Narrated Sa'd's father: 

     When the emigrants reached Medina. Allah's
     Apostle established the bond of fraternity
     between 'Abdur-Rahman and Sad bin Ar-Rabi.
     Sad said to 'Abdur-Rahman, "I am the richest of
     all the Ansar, so I want to divide my property
     (between us), and I have two wives, so see
     which of the two you like and tell me, so that I
     may divorce her, and when she finishes her
     prescribed period (i.e. 'Idda) of divorce, then
     marry her." Abdur-Rahman said, "May Allah
     bless your family and property for you; where is
     your market?" So they showed him the Qainuqa'
     market. (He went there and) returned with a
     profit in the form of dried yogurt and butter. He
     continued going (to the market) till one day he
     came, bearing the traces of yellow scent. The
     Prophet asked, "What is this (scent)?" He
     replied, "I got married." The Prophet asked,
     "How much Mahr did you give her?" He replied,
     "I gave her a date-stone of gold or a gold piece
     equal to the weight of a date-stone." (The
     narrator, Ibrahim, is in doubt as to which is
     correct.) 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 125: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf came to us,
     Allah's Apostle made a bond of fraternity
     between him and Sad bin Ar-Rabi' who was a
     rich man, Sad said, "The Ansar know that I am
     the richest of all of them, so I will divide my
     property into two parts between me and you,
     and I have two wives; see which of the two you
     like so that I may divorce her and you can marry
     her after she becomes lawful to you by her
     passing the prescribed period (i.e. 'Idda) of
     divorce. 'Abdur Rahman said, "May Allah bless
     you your family (i.e. wives) for you." (But
     'Abdur-Rahman went to the market) and did not
     return on that day except with some gain of dried
     yogurt and butter. He went on trading just a few
     days till he came to Allah's Apostle bearing the
     traces of yellow scent over his clothes. Allah's
     Apostle asked him, "What is this scent?" He
     replied, "I have married a woman from the
     Ansar." Allah's Apostle asked, "How much Mahr
     have you given?" He said, "A date-stone weight
     of gold or a golden date-stone." The Prophet
     said, "Arrange a marriage banquet even with a
     sheep." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 126: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Ansar said (to the Prophet ), "Please divide
     the date-palm trees between us and them (i.e.
     emigrants)." The Prophet said, "No." The Ansar
     said, "Let them (i.e. the emigrants) do the labor
     for us in the gardens and share the date-fruits
     with us." The emigrants said, "We accepted this."


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 127: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     I heard the Prophet saying (or the Prophet said),
     "None loves the Ansar but a believer, and none
     hates them but a hypocrite. So Allah will love him
     who loves them, and He will hate him who hates
     them." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 128: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "The sign of Belief is to love
     the Ansar, and the sign of hypocrisy is to hate the
     Ansar." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 129: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet saw the women and children (of the
     Ansar) coming forward. (The sub-narrator said,
     "I think that Anas said, 'They were returning from
     a wedding party.") The Prophet stood up and
     said thrice, "By Allah! You are from the most
     beloved people to me." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 130: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once an Ansari woman, accompanied by a son
     of hers, came to Allah's Apostle. Allah's Apostle
     spoke to her and said twice, "By Him in Whose
     Hand my life is, you are the most beloved people
     to me." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 131: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Al-Arqam: 

     The Annwar said, "O Allah's Apostle! Every
     prophet has his own followers and we have
     followed you. So will you invoke Allah to let our
     followers be considered from us (as Ansar too)?"
     So he invoked Allah accordingly. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 132: 

     Narrated Abu Hamza: 

     (A man from the Ansar) The Ansar said, "Every
     nation has followers and (O Prophet) we have
     followed you, so invoke Allah to let our followers
     be considered from us (as Ansar like ourselves)."
     So the Prophet said, "O Allah! Let their
     followers be considered as Ansar like
     themselves." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 133: 

     Narrated Abu Usaid: 

     The Prophet said, "The best of the Ansar's
     families (homes) are those of Banu An-Najjar
     and then (those of) Banu 'Abdul Ash-hal, then
     (those of) Banu Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj and
     then (those of) Banu Sa'ida; nevertheless, there is
     good in all the families (houses) of the Ansar."
     On this, Sad (bin Ubada) said, "I see that the
     Prophet has preferred some people to us."
     Somebody said (to him), "No, but he has given
     you superiority to many." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 134: 

     Narrated Abu Usaid: 

     That he heard the Prophet saying, "The best of
     the Ansar, or the best of the Ansar families
     (homes) are Banu An-Najjar, Bani 'Abdul
     Ash-hal, Banu Al-Harith and Banu Sai'da." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 135: 

     Narrated Abu Humaid: 

     The Prophet said, "The best of the Ansar families
     (homes) are the families (homes) of Banu
     An-Najjar, and then that of Banu 'Abdul
     Ash-hal, and then that of Banu Al-Harith, and
     then that of Banu Saida; and there is good in all
     the families (homes) of the Ansar." Sad bin
     'Ubada followed us and said, "O Abu Usaid !
     Don't you see that the Prophet compared the
     Ansar and made us the last of them in
     superiority? 

     Then Sad met the Prophet and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! In comparing the Ansar's families
     (homes) as to the degree of superiority, you have
     made us the last of them." Allah's Apostle
     replied, "Isn't it sufficient that you are regarded
     amongst the best?" 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 136: 

     Narrated Usaid bin Hudair: 

     A man from the Ansar said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     Will you appoint me as you have appointed
     so-and-so?" The Prophet said, "After me you
     will see others given preference to you; so be
     patient till you meet me at the Tank (i.e. Lake of
     Kauthar). (on the Day of Resurrection)." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 137: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said to the Ansar, "After me you
     will see others given preference to you; so be
     patient till you meet me, and your promised place
     (of meeting) will be the Tank (i.e. Lake of
     Kauthar)." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 138: 

     Narrated Yahya bin Said: 

     That he heard Anas bin Malik when he went with
     him to Al-Walid, saying, "Once the Prophet
     called the Ansar in order to give them the
     territory of Bahrain they said, 'No, unless you
     give to our emigrant brethren a similar share.' On
     that he said 'If you do not agree to it, then be
     patient till you meet me, for after me others will
     be given preference to you."' 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 139: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There is no life except the
     life of the Hereafter; so, O Allah! Improve the
     state of the Ansar and the Muhajirun." And Anas
     added that the Prophet also said, "O Allah!
     Forgive the Ansar." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 140: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     On the day of the battle of the Trench (i.e.
     Ghazwat-ul-Khandaq) the Ansar used to say,
     "We are those who have given the pledge of
     allegiance to Muhammad for Jihad (i.e. holy
     fighting) as long as we live." The Prophet ,
     replied to them, "O Allah! There is no life except
     the life of the Hereafter; so please honor the
     Ansar and the Emigrants." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 141: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     Allah's Apostle came to us while we were
     digging the trench and carrying out the earth on
     our backs. Allah's Apostle then said, "O Allah !
     There is no life except the life of the Hereafter, so
     please forgive the Emigrants and the Ansar." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 142: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man came to the Prophet. The Prophet sent a
     messenger to his wives (to bring something for
     that man to eat) but they said that they had
     nothing except water. Then Allah's Apostle said,
     "Who will take this (person) or entertain him as a
     guest?" An Ansar man said, "I." So he took him
     to his wife and said to her, "Entertain generously
     the guest of Allah's Apostle " She said, "We have
     got nothing except the meals of my children." He
     said, "Prepare your meal, light your lamp and let
     your children sleep if they ask for supper." So
     she prepared her meal, lighted her lamp and
     made her children sleep, and then stood up
     pretending to mend her lamp, but she put it off.
     Then both of them pretended to be eating, but
     they really went to bed hungry. In the morning
     the Ansari went to Allah's Apostle who said,
     "Tonight Allah laughed or wondered at your
     action." Then Allah revealed: 

     "But give them (emigrants) preference over
     themselves even though they were in need of that
     And whosoever is saved from the covetousness
     Such are they who will be successful." (59.9) 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 143: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Abu Bakr and Al-'Abbas passed by one of the
     gatherings of the Ansar who were weeping then.
     He (i.e. Abu Bakr or Al-'Abbas) asked, "Why
     are you weeping?" They replied, "We are
     weeping because we remember the gathering of
     the Prophet with us." So Abu Bakr went to the
     Prophet and told him of that. The Prophet came
     out, tying his head with a piece of the hem of a
     sheet. He ascended the pulpit which he never
     ascended after that day. He glorified and praised
     Allah and then said, "I request you to take care
     of the Ansar as they are my near companions to
     whom I confided my private secrets. They have
     fulfilled their obligations and rights which were
     enjoined on them but there remains what is for
     them. So, accept the good of the good-doers
     amongst them and excuse the wrongdoers
     amongst them." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 144: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle (in his fatal illness) came out
     wrapped in a sheet covering his shoulders and his
     head was tied with an oily tape of cloth till he sat
     on the pulpit, and after praising and glorifying
     Allah, he said, "Then-after, O people! The
     people will go on increasing, but the Ansar will
     go on decreasing till they become just like salt in
     a meal. So whoever amongst you will be the ruler
     and have the power to harm or benefit others,
     should accept the good of the good-doers
     amongst them and excuse the wrong-doers
     amongst them." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 145: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "The Ansar are my near
     companions to whom I confided my private
     secrets, People will go on increasing but the
     Ansar will go on decreasing; so accept the good
     of the good-doers amongst them and excuse the
     wrong-doers amongst them. " 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 146: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     A silken cloth was given as a present to the
     Prophet . His companions started touching it and
     admiring its softness. The Prophet said, "Are you
     admiring its softness? The handkerchiefs of Sad
     bin Muadh (in Paradise) are better and softer
     than it." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 147: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "The Throne (of
     Allah) shook at the death of Sad bin Muadh."
     Through another group of narrators, Jabir added,
     "I heard the Prophet : saying, 'The Throne of the
     Beneficent shook because of the death of Sad
     bin Muadh." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 148: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Some people (i.e. the Jews of Bani bin Quraiza)
     agreed to accept the verdict of Sad bin Muadh
     so the Prophet sent for him (i.e. Sad bin Muadh).
     He came riding a donkey, and when he
     approached the Mosque, the Prophet said, "Get
     up for the best amongst you." or said, "Get up for
     your chief." Then the Prophet said, "O Sad!
     These people have agreed to accept your
     verdict." Sad said, "I judge that their warriors
     should be killed and their children and women
     should be taken as captives." The Prophet said,
     "You have given a judgment similar to Allah's
     Judgment (or the King's judgment)." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 149: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Two men left the Prophet on a very dark night.
     Suddenly a light came in front of them, and when
     they separated, the light also separated along
     with them. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 150: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Learn the recitation
     of Qur'an from four persons: Ibn Mas'ud, Salim,
     the freed slave of Abu Hudhaifa, Ubai and
     Muadh bin Jabal." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 151: 

     Narrated the virtue of Sad bin Ubada: 

     Aisha said, "Before that, he (i.e. Sad) was a
     pious man." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 152: 

     Narrated Abu Usaid: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The best of the Ansar's
     houses are those of Bani An-Najjar, then those
     of Bani 'Abdul Ash-hal, then those of Bani
     Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj, then those of Bani
     Saida; but there is goodness in all the houses of
     the Ansar." Sad bin Ubada who was one of
     those who embraced Islam early, said, "I see that
     Allah's Apostle is giving others superiority above
     us." Some people said to him, "But he has given
     you superiority above many other people." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 153: 

     Narrated Masruq: 

     'Abdullah bin Masud was mentioned before
     Abdullah bin 'Amr who said, "That is a man I still
     love, as I heard the Prophet saying 'Learn the
     recitation of Quran from four from 'Abdullah bin
     Mas'ud --he started with him--Salim, the freed
     slave of Abu Hudaifa, Mu'adh bin Jabal and
     Ubai bin Ka'b." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 154: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said to Ubai, "Allah has ordered me
     to recite to you: 'Those who disbelieve
     (Surat-al-Bayina 98).' " Ubai said, "Has He
     mentioned my name?" The Prophet said, "Yes."
     On hearing this, Ubai started weeping. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 155: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     Anas said, "The Quran was collected in the
     lifetime of the Prophet by four (men), all of whom
     were from the Ansar: Ubai, Muadh bin Jabal,
     Abu Zaid and Zaid bin Thabit." I asked Anas,
     "Who is Abu Zaid?" He said, "One of my
     uncles." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 156: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     On the day of the battle of Uhud, the people ran
     away, leaving the Prophet , but Abu- Talha was
     shielding the Prophet with his shield in front of
     him. Abu Talha was a strong, experienced archer
     who used to keep his arrow bow strong and well
     stretched. On that day he broke two or three
     arrow bows. If any man passed by carrying a
     quiver full of arrows, the Prophet would say to
     him, "Empty it in front of Abu Talha." When the
     Prophet stated looking at the enemy by raising
     his head, Abu Talha said, "O Allah's Prophet!
     Let my parents be sacrificed for your sake!
     Please don't raise your head and make it visible,
     lest an arrow of the enemy should hit you. Let my
     neck and chest be wounded instead of yours."
     (On that day) I saw 'Aisha, the daughter of Abu
     Bakr and Um Sulaim both lifting their dresses up
     so that I was able to see the ornaments of their
     legs, and they were carrying the water skins of
     their arms to pour the water into the mouths of
     the thirsty people and then go back and fill them
     and come to pour the water into the mouths of
     the people again. (On that day) Abu Talha's
     sword fell from his hand twice or thrice. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 157: 

     Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas: 

     I have never heard the Prophet saying about
     anybody walking on the earth that he is from the
     people of Paradise except 'Abdullah bin Salam.
     The following Verse was revealed concerning
     him: "And a witness from the children of Israel
     testifies that this Qur'an is true" (46.10) 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 158: 

     Narrated Qais bin Ubad: 

     While I was sitting in the Mosque of Medina,
     there entered a man (Abdullah bin Salam) with
     signs of solemnity over his face. The people said,
     "He is one of the people of Paradise." He prayed
     two light Rakat and then left. I followed him and
     said, "When you entered the Mosque, the people
     said, 'He is one of the people of Paradise.' " He
     said, "By Allah, one ought not say what he does
     not know; and I will tell you why. In the lifetime
     of the Prophet I had a dream which I narrated to
     him. I saw as if I were in a garden." He then
     described its extension and greenery. He added:
     In its center there was an iron pillar whose lower
     end was fixed in the earth and the upper end was
     in the sky, and at its upper end there was a
     (ring-shaped) hand-hold. I was told to climb it. I
     said, "I can't." "Then a servant came to me and
     lifted my clothes from behind and I climbed till I
     reached the top (of the pillar). Then I got hold of
     the hand-hold, and I was told to hold it tightly,
     then I woke up and (the effect of) the hand-hold
     was in my hand. I narrated al I that to the
     Prophet who said, 'The garden is Islam, and the
     hand-hold is the Most Truth-worthy Hand-Hold.
     So you will remain as a Muslim till you die." The
     narrator added: "The man was 'Abdullah bin
     Salam." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 159: 

     Narrated Abu Burda: 

     When I came to Medina. I met Abdullah bin
     Salam. He said, "Will you come to me so that I
     may serve you with Sawiq (i.e. powdered
     barley) and dates, and let you enter a (blessed)
     house that in which the Prophet entered?" Then
     he added, "You are In a country where the
     practice of Riba (i.e. usury) is prevalent; so if
     somebody owe you something and he sends you
     a present of a load of chopped straw or a load of
     barley or a load of provender then do not take it,
     as it is Riba." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 160: 

     Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle has never refused to admit me
     since I embraced Islam, and whenever he saw
     me, he would smile. (In another narration) Jarir
     bin 'Abdullah narrated: There was a house called
     Dhul-Khalasa in the Pre-lslamic Period and it
     was also called Al-Ka'ba Al-Yamaniya or
     Al-Ka'ba Ash-Shamiya. Allah's Apostle said to
     me, "Will you relieve me from Dhul-Khalasa?"
     So I left for it with 150 cavalrymen from the tribe
     of Ahmas and then we destroyed it and killed
     whoever we found there. Then we came to the
     Prophet and informed him about it. He invoked
     good upon us and upon the tribe of Ahmas. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 161: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     On the day of the battle of Uhud the pagans
     were defeated completely. Then Satan shouted
     loudly, "O Allah's slaves! Beware the ones
     behind you!" So the front files attacked the back
     ones. Then Hudhaifa looked and saw his father,
     and said loudly, "O Allah's slaves! My father!
     My father!" By Allah, they did not stop till they
     killed him (i.e. Hudaifa's father). Hudhaifa said,
     "May Allah forgive you!" The sub-narrator said,
     "By Allah, because of what Hudhaifa said, he
     remained in a good state till he met Allah (i.e.
     died)." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 162: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying (as below). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 163: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     The Prophet said, "The best of the world's
     women is Mary (at her lifetime), and the best of
     the world's women is Khadija (at her lifetime)." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 164: 

     Narrated 

     'Aisha: I did not feel jealous of any of the wives
     of the Prophet as much as I did of Khadija
     (although) she died before he married me, for I
     often heard him mentioning her, and Allah had
     told him to give her the good tidings that she
     would have a palace of Qasab (i.e. pipes of
     precious stones and pearls in Paradise), and
     whenever he slaughtered a sheep, he would send
     her women-friends a good share of it. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 165: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I did not feel jealous of any woman as much as I
     did of Khadija because Allah's Apostle used to
     mention her very often. He married me after
     three years of her death, and his Lord (or
     Gabriel) ordered him to give her the good news
     of having a palace of Qasab in Paradise. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 166: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I did not feel jealous of any of the wives of the
     Prophet as much as I did of Khadija though I did
     not see her, but the Prophet used to mention her
     very often, and when ever he slaughtered a
     sheep, he would cut its parts and send them to
     the women friends of Khadija. When I
     sometimes said to him, "(You treat Khadija in
     such a way) as if there is no woman on earth
     except Khadija," he would say, "Khadija was
     such-and-such, and from her I had children." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 167: 

     Narrated Ismail: 

     I asked 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa, "Did the Prophet
     give glad tidings to Khadija?" He said, "Yes, of a
     palace of Qasab (in Paradise) where there will
     be neither any noise nor any fatigue." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 168: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Gabriel came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! This is Khadija coming to you with a
     dish having meat soup (or some food or drink).
     When she reaches you, greet her on behalf of her
     Lord (i.e. Allah) and on my behalf, and give her
     the glad tidings of having a Qasab palace in
     Paradise wherein there will be neither any noise
     nor any fatigue (trouble) . " 

     Narrated 'Aisha: Once Hala bint Khuwailid,
     Khadija's sister, asked the permission of the
     Prophet to enter. On that, the Prophet
     remembered the way Khadija used to ask
     permission, and that upset him. He said, "O
     Allah! Hala!" So I became jealous and said,
     "What makes you remember an old woman
     amongst the old women of Quraish an old
     woman (with a teethless mouth) of red gums who
     died long ago, and in whose place Allah has
     given you somebody better than her?" 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 169: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet met Zaid bin 'Amr bin Nufail in the
     bottom of (the valley of) Baldah before any
     Divine Inspiration came to the Prophet. A meal
     was presented to the Prophet but he refused to
     eat from it. (Then it was presented to Zaid) who
     said, "I do not eat anything which you slaughter in
     the name of your stone idols. I eat none but those
     things on which Allah's Name has been
     mentioned at the time of slaughtering." Zaid bin
     'Amr used to criticize the way Quraish used to
     slaughter their animals, and used to say, "Allah
     has created the sheep and He has sent the water
     for it from the sky, and He has grown the grass
     for it from the earth; yet you slaughter it in other
     than the Name of Allah. He used to say so, for
     he rejected that practice and considered it as
     something abominable. 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: Zaid bin 'Amr bin Nufail
     went to Sham, inquiring about a true religion to
     follow. He met a Jewish religious scholar and
     asked him about their religion. He said, "I intend
     to embrace your religion, so tell me some thing
     about it." The Jew said, "You will not embrace
     our religion unless you receive your share of
     Allah's Anger." Zaid said, "'I do not run except
     from Allah's Anger, and I will never bear a bit of
     it if I have the power to avoid it. Can you tell me
     of some other religion?" He said, "I do not know
     any other religion except the Hanif." Zaid
     enquired, "What is Hanif?" He said, "Hanif is the
     religion of (the prophet) Abraham who was
     neither a Jew nor a Christian, and he used to
     worship None but Allah (Alone)" Then Zaid
     went out and met a Christian religious scholar
     and told him the same as before. The Christian
     said, "You will not embrace our religion unless
     you get a share of Allah's Curse." Zaid replied, "I
     do not run except from Allah's Curse, and I will
     never bear any of Allah's Curse and His Anger if
     I have the power to avoid them. Will you tell me
     of some other religion?" He replied, "I do not
     know any other religion except Hanif." Zaid
     enquired, "What is Hanif?" He replied, Hanif is
     the religion of (the prophet) Abraham who was
     neither a Jew nor a Christian and he used to
     worship None but Allah (Alone)" When Zaid
     heard their Statement about (the religion of)
     Abraham, he left that place, and when he came
     out, he raised both his hands and said, "O Allah!
     I make You my Witness that I am on the religion
     of Abraham." 

     Narrated Asma bint Abi Bakr: I saw Zaid bin
     Amr bin Nufail standing with his back against the
     Ka'ba and saying, "O people of Quraish! By
     Allah, none amongst you is on the religion of
     Abraham except me." He used to preserve the
     lives of little girls: If somebody wanted to kill his
     daughter he would say to him, "Do not kill her for
     I will feed her on your behalf." So he would take
     her, and when she grew up nicely, he would say
     to her father, "Now if you want her, I will give
     her to you, and if you wish, I will feed her on
     your behalf." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 170: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     When the Ka'ba was rebuilt, the Prophet and
     'Abbas went to carry stones. 'Abbas said to the
     Prophet "(Take off and) put your waist sheet
     over your neck so that the stones may not hurt
     you." (But as soon as he took off his waist sheet)
     he fell unconscious on the ground with both his
     eyes towards the sky. When he came to his
     senses, he said, "My waist sheet! My waist
     sheet!" Then he tied his waist sheet (round his
     waist). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 171: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Dinar and 'Ubaidullah bin Abi
     Yazid: 

     In the lifetime of the Prophet there was no wall
     around the Ka'ba and the people used to pray
     around the Ka'ba till 'Umar became the Caliph
     and he built the wall around it. 'Ubaidullah further
     said, "Its wall was low, so Ibn Az-Zubair built it."


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 172: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     'Ashura' (i.e. the tenth of Muharram) was a day
     on which the tribe of Quraish used to fast in the
     pre-lslamic period of ignorance. The Prophet
     also used to fast on this day. So when he
     migrated to Medina, he fasted on it and ordered
     (the Muslims) to fast on it. When the fasting of
     Ramadan was enjoined, it became optional for
     the people to fast or not to fast on the day of
     Ashura. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 173: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The people used to consider the performance of
     'Umra in the months of Hajj an evil deed on the
     earth, and they used to call the month of
     Muharram as Safar and used to say, "When (the
     wounds over) the backs (of the camels) have
     healed and the foot-marks (of the camels) have
     vanished (after coming from Hajj), then 'Umra
     becomes legal for the one who wants to perform
     'Umra." Allah's Apostle and his companions
     reached Mecca assuming Ihram for Hajj on the
     fourth of Dhul-Hijja. The Prophet ordered his
     companions to perform 'Umra (with that lhram
     instead of Hajj). They asked, "O Allah's Apostle!
     What kind of finishing of Ihram?" The Prophet
     said, "Finish the Ihram completely.' 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 174: 

     Narrated Sa'id bin Al-Musaiyab's grand-father: 

     In the pre-lslamic period of ignorance a flood of
     rain came and filled the valley in between the two
     mountains (around the Ka'ba)...... 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 175: 

     Narrated Qais bin Abi Hazim: 

     Abu Bakr went to a lady from the Ahmas tribe
     called Zainab bint Al-Muhajir and found that she
     refused to speak. He asked, "Why does she not
     speak." The people said, "She has intended to
     perform Hajj without speaking." He said to her,
     "Speak, for it is illegal not to speak, as it is an
     action of the pre-islamic period of ignorance. So
     she spoke and said, "Who are you?" He said, "A
     man from the Emigrants." She asked, "Which
     Emigrants?" He replied, "From Quraish." She
     asked, "From what branch of Quraish are you?"
     He said, "You ask too many questions; I am Abu
     Bakr." She said, "How long shall we enjoy this
     good order (i.e. Islamic religion) which Allah has
     brought after the period of ignorance?" He said,
     "You will enjoy it as long as your Imams keep on
     abiding by its rules and regulations." She asked,
     "What are the Imams?" He said, "Were there not
     heads and chiefs of your nation who used to
     order the people and they used to obey them?"
     She said, "Yes." He said, "So they (i.e. the
     Imams) are those whom I meant." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 176: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     A black lady slave of some of the 'Arabs
     embraced Islam and she had a hut in the mosque.
     She used to visit us and talk to us, and when she
     finished her talk, she used to say: "The day of the
     scarf was one of our Lord's wonders: Verily! He
     has delivered me from the land of Kufr." When
     she said the above verse many times, I (i.e.
     'Aisha) asked her, "What was the day of the
     scarf?" She replied, "Once the daughter of some
     of my masters went out and she was wearing a
     leather scarf (round her neck) and the leather
     scarf fell from her and a kite descended and
     picked it up, mistaking it for a piece of meat.
     They (i.e. my masters) accused me of stealing it
     and they tortured me to such an extent that they
     even looked for it in my private parts. So, while
     they all were around me, and I was in my great
     distress, suddenly the kite came over our heads
     and threw the scarf, and they took it. I said to
     them 'This is what you accused me of stealing,
     though I was innocent." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 177: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "If anybody has to take an
     oath, he should swear only by Allah." The people
     of Quraish used to swear by their fathers, but the
     Prophet said, "Do not swear by your fathers. " 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 178: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Qasim: 

     Al-Qasim used to walk in front of the funeral
     procession. He used not to get up for the funeral
     procession (in case it passed by him). And he
     narrated from 'Aisha that she said, "The people
     of the pre-lslamic period of ignorance used to
     stand up for the funeral procession. When they
     saw it they used to say twice: 'You were noble in
     your family. What are you now?" 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 179: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     The pagans used not to leave Jam' (i.e.
     Muzdalifa) till the sun had risen on Thabir
     mountain. The Prophet contradicted them by
     leaving (Muzdalifa) before the sun rose. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 180: 

     Narrated Husain: 

     That Ikrima said, "Kasan Dihaqa means glass full
     (of something) followed successively with other
     full glasses." Ibn 'Abbas said, "In the pre-lslamic
     period of ignorance I heard my father saying,
     "Provide us with Kasan Dihaqa." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 181: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The most true words said by
     a poet was the words of Labid." He said, Verily,
     Everything except Allah is perishable and Umaiya
     bin As-Salt was about to be a Muslim (but he
     did not embrace Islam). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 182: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Abu Bakr had a slave who used to give him
     some of his earnings. Abu Bakr used to eat from
     it. One day he brought something and Abu Bakr
     ate from it. The slave said to him, "Do you know
     what this is?" Abu Bakr then enquired, "What is
     it?" The slave said, "Once, in the pre-Islamic
     period of ignorance I foretold somebody's future
     though I did not know this knowledge of
     foretelling but I, cheated him, and when he met
     me, he gave me something for that service, and
     that is what you have eaten from." Then Abu
     Bakr put his hand in his mouth and vomited
     whatever was present in his stomach. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 183: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     In the pre-lslamic period of ignorance the people
     used to bargain with the meat of camels on the
     principle of Habal-al-Habala which meant the
     sale of a she-camel that would be born by a
     she-camel that had not yet been born. The
     Prophet forbade them such a transaction. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 184: 

     Narrated Ghailan bin Jarir: 

     We used to visit Anas bin Malik and he used to
     talk to us about the Ansar, and used to say to
     me: "Your people did so-and-so on
     such-and-such a day, and your people did
     so-and-so on such-and-such a day." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 185: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The first event of Qasama in the pre-lslamic
     period of ignorance was practiced by us (i.e.
     Banu Hashim). A man from Banu Hashim was
     employed by a Quraishi man from another
     branch-family. The (Hashimi) laborer set out with
     the Quraishi driving his camels. There passed by
     him another man from Banu Hashim. The leather
     rope of the latter's bag had broken so he said to
     the laborer, "Will you help me by giving me a
     rope in order to tie the handle of my bag lest the
     camels should run away from me?" The laborer
     gave him a rope and the latter tied his bag with it.
     When the caravan halted, all the camels' legs
     were tied with their fetters except one camel. The
     employer asked the laborer, "Why, from among
     all the camels has this camel not been fettered?"
     He replied, "There is no fetter for it." The
     Quraishi asked, "Where is its fetter?" and hit the
     laborer with a stick that caused his death (later
     on Just before his death) a man from Yemen
     passed by him. The laborer asked (him), "Will
     you go for the pilgrimage?" He replied, "I do not
     think I will attend it, but perhaps I will attend it."
     The (Hashimi) laborer said, "Will you please
     convey a message for me once in your life?" The
     other man said, "yes." The laborer wrote: 'When
     you attend the pilgrimage, call the family of
     Quraish, and if they respond to you, call the
     family of Banu Hashim, and if they respond to
     you, ask about Abu Talib and tell him that
     so-and-so has killed me for a fetter." Then the
     laborer expired. When the employer reached
     (Mecca), Abu Talib visited him and asked,
     "What has happened to our companion?" He
     said, "He became ill and I looked after him nicely
     (but he died) and I buried him." Then Abu Talib
     said, "The deceased deserved this from you."
     After some time, the messenger whom the
     laborer has asked to convey the message,
     reached during the pilgrimage season. He called,
     "O the family of Quraish!" The people replied,
     "This is Quraish." Then he called, "O the family of
     Banu Hashim!" Again the people replied, "This is
     Banu Hashim." He asked, "Who is Abu Talib?"
     The people replied, "This is Abu Talib." He said,
     "'So-and-so has asked me to convey a message
     to you that so-and-so has killed him for a fetter
     (of a camel)." Then Abu Talib went to the
     (Quraishi) killer and said to him, "Choose one of
     three alternatives: (i) If you wish, give us
     one-hundred camels because you have murdered
     our companion, (ii) or if you wish, fifty of your
     men should take an oath that you have not
     murdered our companion, and if you do not
     accept this, (iii) we will kill you in Qisas." The
     killer went to his people and they said, "We will
     take an oath." Then a woman from Banu Hashim
     who was married to one of them (i.e.the
     Quraishis) and had given birth to a child from
     him, came to Abu Talib and said, "O Abu Talib!
     I wish that my son from among the fifty men,
     should be excused from this oath, and that he
     should not take the oath where the oath-taking is
     carried on." Abu Talib excused him. Then
     another man from them came (to Abu Talib) and
     said, "O Abu Talib! You want fifty persons to
     take an oath instead of giving a hundred camels,
     and that means each man has to give two camels
     (in case he does not take an oath). So there are
     two camels I would like you to accept from me
     and excuse me from taking an oath where the
     oaths are taken. Abu Talib accepted them from
     him. Then 48 men came and took the oath. Ibn
     'Abbas further said:) By Him in Whose Hand my
     life is, before the end of that year, none of those
     48 persons remained alive. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 186: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah caused the day of Buath to take place
     before Allah's Apostle was sent (as an Apostle)
     so that when Allah's Apostle reached Medina,
     those people had already divided (in different
     groups) and their chiefs had been killed or
     wounded. So Allah made that day precede
     Allah's Apostle so that they (i.e. the Ansar) might
     embrace Islam. 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: To run along the valley
     between two green pillars of Safa and Marwa
     (mountains) was not Sunna, but the people in the
     pre-islamic period of ignorance used to run along
     it, and used to say: "We do not cross this rain
     stream except running strongly. " 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 187: 

     Narrated Abu As-Safar: 

     I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, "O people! Listen to
     what I say to you, and let me hear whatever you
     say, and don't go (without understanding), and
     start saying, 'Ibn 'Abbas said so-and-so, Ibn
     'Abbas said so-and-so, Ibn 'Abbas said
     so-and-so.' He who wants to perform the Tawaf
     around the Ka'ba should go behind Al-Hijr (i.e. a
     portion of the Ka'ba left out unroofed) and do
     not call it Al-Hatim, for in the pre-Islamic period
     of ignorance if any man took an oath, he used to
     throw his whip, shoes or bow in it. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 188: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun: 

     During the pre-lslamic period of ignorance I saw
     a she-monkey surrounded by a number of
     monkeys. They were all stoning it, because it had
     committed illegal sexual intercourse. I too, stoned
     it along with them. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 189: 

     Narrated Sufyan: 

     'Ubaidullah said: "I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying,
     "Following are some traits of the people of the
     pre-Islamic period of ignorance (i) to defame the
     ancestry of other families, (ii) and to wail over the
     dead." 'Ubaidullah forgot the third trait. Sufyan
     said, "They say it (i.e. the third trait) was to
     believe that rain was caused by the influence of
     stars (i.e. if a special star appears it will rain)." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 190: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle was inspired Divinely at the age
     of forty. Then he stayed in Mecca for thirteen
     years, and then was ordered to migrate, and he
     migrated to Medina and stayed there for ten
     years and then died. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 191: 

     Narrated Khabbaba: 

     I came to the Prophet while he was leaning
     against his sheet cloak in the shade of the Ka'ba.
     We were suffering greatly from the pagans in
     those days. i said (to him). "Will you invoke Allah
     (to help us)?" He sat down with a red face and
     said, "(A believer among) those who were before
     you used to be combed with iron combs so that
     nothing of his flesh or nerves would remain on his
     bones; yet that would never make him desert his
     religion. A saw might be put over the parting of
     his head which would be split into two parts, yet
     all that would never make him abandon his
     religion. Allah will surely complete this religion
     (i.e. Islam) so that a traveler from Sana to
     Hadra-maut will not be afraid of anybody except
     Allah." (The sub-narrator, Baiyan added, "Or the
     wolf, lest it should harm his sheep.") 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 192: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet recited Surat An-Najam and
     prostrated, and there was nobody who did not
     prostrate then except a man whom I saw taking a
     handful of pebbles, lifting it, and prostrating on it.
     He then said, "This is sufficient for me." No
     doubt I saw him killed as a disbeliever
     afterwards. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 193: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     While the Prophet was prostrating, surrounded
     by some of Quraish, 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait
     brought the intestines (i.e. abdominal contents) of
     a camel and put them over the back of the
     Prophet. The Prophet did not raise his head, (till)
     Fatima, came and took it off his back and cursed
     the one who had done the harm. The Prophet
     said, "O Allah! Destroy the chiefs of Quraish,
     Abu Jahl bin Hisham, 'Utba bin Rabi'al, Shaba
     bin Rabi'a, Umaiya bin Khalaf or Ubai bin
     Khalaf." (The sub-narrator Shu'ba, is not sure of
     the last name.) I saw these people killed on the
     day of Badr battle and thrown in the well except
     Umaiya or Ubai whose body parts were
     mutilated but he was not thrown in the well. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 194: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     'AbdurRahman bin Abza said, "Ask Ibn 'Abbas
     about these two Qur'anic Verses: 'Nor kill such
     life as Allah has made sacred, Except for just
     cause.' (25.168) "And whoever kills a believer
     intentionally, his recompense is Hell. (4.93) 

     So I asked Ibn 'Abbas who said, "When the
     Verse that is in Sura-al-Furqan was revealed, the
     pagans of Mecca said, 'But we have slain such
     life as Allah has made sacred, and we have
     invoked other gods along with Allah, and we
     have also committed fornication.' So Allah
     revealed:-- 'Except those who repent, believe,
     and do good-- (25.70) 

     So this Verse was concerned with those people.
     As for the Verse in Surat-an-Nisa (4-93), it
     means that if a man, after understanding Islam
     and its laws and obligations, murders somebody,
     then his punishment is to dwell in the (Hell) Fire
     forever." Then I mentioned this to Mujahid who
     said, "Except the one who regrets (one's crime) .
     " 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 195: 

     Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 

     I asked Ibn Amr bin Al-As, "Tell me of the worst
     thing which the pagans did to the Prophet." He
     said, "While the Prophet was praying in the Hijr
     of the Ka'ba; 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait came and put
     his garment around the Prophet's neck and
     throttled him violently. Abu Bakr came and
     caught him by his shoulder and pushed him away
     from the Prophet and said, "Do you want to kill a
     man just because he says, 'My Lord is Allah?' " 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 196: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     As above (Hadith 195). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 197: 

     Narrated 'Ammar bin Yasir: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle , and the only converts (to
     Islam) with him, were five slaves, two women
     and Abu Bakr. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 198: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq Saud bin Abi Waqqas: 

     None embraced Islam, except on the day I
     embraced it. And for seven days I was one of
     the three persons who were Muslims (one-third
     of Islam). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 199: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman: 

     "I asked Masruq, 'Who informed the Prophet
     about the Jinns at the night when they heard the
     Qur'an?' He said, 'Your father 'Abdullah
     informed me that a tree informed the Prophet
     about them.' " 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 200: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     That once he was in the, company of the Prophet
     carrying a water pot for his ablution and for
     cleaning his private parts. While he was following
     him carrying it(i.e. the pot), the Prophet said,
     "Who is this?" He said, "I am Abu Huraira." The
     Prophet said, "Bring me stones in order to clean
     my private parts, and do not bring any bones or
     animal dung." Abu Huraira went on narrating: So
     I brought some stones, carrying them in the
     corner of my robe till I put them by his side and
     went away. When he finished, I walked with him
     and asked, "What about the bone and the animal
     dung?" He said, "They are of the food of Jinns.
     The delegate of Jinns of (the city of) Nasibin
     came to me--and how nice those Jinns
     were--and asked me for the remains of the
     human food. I invoked Allah for them that they
     would never pass by a bone or animal dung but
     find food on them." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 201: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     When Abu Dhar received the news of the
     Advent of the Prophet he said to his brother,
     "Ride to this valley (of Mecca) and try to find out
     the truth of the person who claims to be a
     prophet who is informed of the news of Heaven.
     Listen to what he says and come back to me."
     So his brother set out and came to the Prophet
     and listened to some of his talks, and returned to
     Abu Dhar and said to him. "I have seen him
     enjoining virtuous behavior and saying something
     that is not poetry." Abu Dhar said, "You have not
     satisfied me as to what I wanted." He then took
     his journey-food and carried a water-skin of his,
     containing some water till be reached Mecca. He
     went to the Mosque and searched for the
     Prophet and though he did not know him, he
     hated to ask anybody about him. When a part of
     the night had passed away, 'Ali saw him and
     knew that he was a stranger. So when Abu Dhar
     saw 'Ali, he followed him, and none of them
     asked his companion about anything, and when it
     was dawn, Abu Dhar took his journey food and
     his water-skin to the Mosque and stayed there all
     the day long without being perceived by the
     Prophet, and when it was evening, he came back
     to his retiring place. 'Ali passed by him and said,
     "Has the man not known his dwelling place yet?"
     So 'Ali awakened him and took him with him and
     none of them spoke to the other about anything.
     When it was the third day. 'Ali did the same and
     Abu Dhar stayed with him. Then 'Ali said "Will
     you tell me what has brought you here?" Abu
     Dhar said, "If you give me a firm promise that
     you will guide me, then I will tell you." 'Ali
     promised him, and he informed 'Ali about the
     matter. 'Ali said, "It is true, and he is the Apostle
     of Allah. Next morning when you get up,
     accompany me, and if I see any danger for you, I
     will stop as if to pass water, but if I go on, follow
     me and enter the place which I will enter." Abu
     Dhar did so, and followed 'Ali till he entered the
     place of the Prophet, and Abu Dhar went in with
     him, Abu Dhar listened to some of the Prophet's
     talks and embraced Islam on the spot. The
     Prophet said to him, "Go back to your people
     and inform them (about it) till you receive my
     order." Abu Dhar said, "By Him in Whose Hand
     my life is, I will proclaim my conversion loudly
     amongst them (i.e. the pagans)." So he went out,
     and when he reached the Mosque, he said as
     loudly as possible, "I bear witness that None has
     the right to be worshipped except Allah, and
     Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah." The People
     got up and beat him painfully. Then Al-Abbas
     came and knelt over him ((to protect him) and
     said (to the people), "Woe to you! Don't you
     know that this man belongs to the tribe of Ghifar
     and your trade to Sha'm is through their way?"
     So he rescued him from them. Abu Dhar again
     did the same the next day. They beat him and
     took vengeance on him and again Al-Abbas
     knelt over him (to protect him). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 202: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     I heard Said bin Zaid bin 'Amr bin Nufail saying
     in the mosque of Al-Kufa. "By Allah, I have seen
     myself tied and forced by 'Umar to leave Islam
     before 'Umar himself embraced Islam. And if the
     mountain of Uhud could move from its place for
     the evil which you people have done to 'Uthman,
     then it would have the right to move from its
     place." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 203: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mus'ud: 

     We have been powerful since 'Umar embraced
     Islam. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 204: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     While 'Umar was at home in a state of fear, there
     came Al-'As bin Wail As-Sahmi Abu 'Amr,
     wearing an embroidered cloak and a shirt having
     silk hems. He was from the tribe of Bani Sahm
     who were our allies during the pre-Islamic period
     of ignorance. Al-'As said to 'Umar "What is
     wrong with you?" He said, "Your people claim
     that they would kill me if I become a Muslim."
     Al-'As said, "Nobody will harm you after I have
     given protection to you." So Al-'As went out and
     met the people streaming in the whole valley. He
     said, "Where are you going?" They said, "We
     want Ibn Al-Khattab who has embraced Islam."
     Al-'As said, "There is no way for anybody to
     touch him." So the people retreated. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 205: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     When 'Umar embraced Islam, all The
     (disbelieving) people gathered around his home
     and said, "'Umar has embraced Islam." At that
     time I was still a boy and was on the roof of my
     house. There came a man wearing a cloak of
     Dibaj (i.e. a kind of silk), and said, "Umar has
     embraced Islam. Nobody can harm him for I am
     his protector." I then saw the people going away
     from 'Umar and asked who the man was, and
     they said, "Al-'As bin Wail." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 206: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     I never heard 'Umar saying about something that
     he thought it would be so-and-so, but he was
     quite right. Once, while 'Umar was sitting, a
     handsome man passed by him, 'Umar said, "If I
     am not wrong, this person is still on his religion of
     the pre-lslamic period of ignorance or he was
     their foreteller. Call the man to me." When the
     man was called to him, he told him of his thought.
     The man said, "I have never seen such a day on
     which a Muslim is faced with such an
     accusation." 'Umar said, "I am determined that
     you should tell me the truth." He said, "I was a
     foreteller in the pre-lslamic period of ignorance."
     Then 'Umar said, "Tell me the most astonishing
     thing your female Jinn has told you of." He said,
     "One-day while I was in the market, she came to
     me scared and said, 'Haven't you seen the Jinns
     and their despair and they were overthrown after
     their defeat (and prevented from listening to the
     news of the heaven) so that they (stopped going
     to the sky and) kept following camel-riders (i.e.
     'Arabs)?" 'Umar said, "He is right." and added,
     "One day while I was near their idols, there came
     a man with a calf and slaughtered it as a sacrifice
     (for the idols). An (unseen) creature shouted at
     him, and I have never heard harsher than his
     voice. He was crying, 'O you bold evil-doer! A
     matter of success! An eloquent man is saying:
     None has the right to be worshipped except you
     (O Allah).' On that the people fled, but I said, 'I
     shall not go away till I know what is behind this.'
     Then the cry came again: 'O you bold evil-doer!
     A matter of success! An eloquent man is saying:
     None has the right to be worshipped except
     Allah.' I then went away and a few days later it
     was said, "A prophet has appeared." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 207: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     I heard Said bin Zaid saying to the people, "If
     you but saw me and 'Umar's sister tied and
     forced by 'Umar to leave Islam while he was not
     yet a Muslim. And if the mountain of Uhud could
     move from its place for the evil which you people
     have done to Uthman, it would have the right to
     do that." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 208: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The people of Mecca asked Allah's Apostle to
     show them a miracle. So he showed them the
     moon split in two halves between which they saw
     the Hiram' mountain. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 209: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The moon was split ( into two pieces ) while we
     were with the Prophet in Mina. He said, "Be
     witnesses." Then a Piece of the moon went
     towards the mountain. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 210: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     During the lifetime of Allah's Apostle the moon
     was split (into two places). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 211: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The moon was split (into two pieces). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 212: 

     Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Adi bin Al-Khiyar: 

     That Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and
     'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Aswad bin 'Abu Yaghuth
     had said to him, "What prevents you from
     speaking to your uncle 'Uthman regarding his
     brother Al-Walid bin 'Uqba?" The people were
     speaking against the latter for what he had done.
     'Ubaidullah said, "So I kept waiting for 'Uthman,
     and when he went out for the prayer, I said to
     him, 'I have got something to say to you as a
     piece of advice.' 'Uthman said, 'O man! I seek
     Refuge with Allah from you. So I went away.
     When I finished my prayer, I sat with Al-Miswar
     and Ibn 'Abu Yaghuth and talked to both of them
     of what I had said to 'Uthman and what he had
     said to me. They said, 'You have done your
     duty.' So while I was sitting with them. 'Uthman's
     Messenger came to me. They said, 'Allah has put
     you to trial." I set out and when I reached
     'Uthman, he said, 'What is your advice which you
     mentioned a while ago?' I recited Tashahhud and
     added, 'Allah has sent Muhammad and has
     revealed the Holy Book (i.e. Quran) to him. You
     (O Uthman!) were amongst those who
     responded to the call of Allah and His Apostle
     and had faith in him. And you took part in the
     first two migrations (to Ethiopia and to Medina),
     and you enjoyed the company of Allah's Apostle
     and learned his traditions and advice. Now the
     people are talking much about Al-Walid bin
     'Uqba and so it is your duty to impose on him the
     legal punishment.' 'Uthman then said to me, 'O
     my nephew! Did you ever meet Allah's Apostle
     ?' I said, 'No, but his knowledge has reached me
     as it has reached the virgin in her seclusion.'
     'Uthman then recited Tashahhud and said, 'No
     doubt, Allah has sent Muhammad with the Truth
     and has revealed to him His Holy Book (i.e.
     Quran) and I was amongst those who responded
     to the call of Allah and His Apostle and I had
     faith in Muhammad's Mission, and I had
     performed the first two migrations as you have
     said, and I enjoyed the company of Allah's
     Apostle and gave the pledge of allegiance to him.
     By Allah, I never disobeyed him and never
     cheated him till Allah caused him to die. Then
     Allah made Abu Bakr Caliph, and by Allah, I
     was never disobedient to him, nor did I cheat
     him. Then 'Umar became Caliph, and by Allah, I
     was never disobedient to him, nor did I cheat
     him. Then I became Caliph. Have I not then the
     same rights over you as they had over me?' I
     replied in the affirmative. 'Uthman further said,
     'The what are these talks which are reaching me
     from you? As for what you ha mentioned about
     Al-Walid bin 'Uqb; Allah willing, I shall give him
     the leg; punishment justly. Then Uthman ordered
     that Al-Walid be flogged fort lashes. He ordered
     'Ali to flog him an he himself flogged him as well."


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 213: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Um Habiba and Um Salama mentioned a church
     they had seen in Ethiopia and in the church there
     were pictures. When they told the Prophet of
     this, he said, "Those people are such that if a
     pious man amongst them died, they build a place
     of worship over his grave and paint these
     pictures in it. Those people will be Allah's worst
     creatures on the Day of Resurrection . " 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 214: 

     Narrated Um Khalid bint Khalid: 

     When I came from Ethiopia (to Medina), I was a
     young girl. Allah's Apostle made me wear a sheet
     having marks on it. Allah's Apostle was rubbing
     those marks with his hands saying, "Sanah!
     Sanah!" (i.e. good, good). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 215: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     We used to greet the Prophet while he used to
     be in prayers, and he used to reply to our
     greetings. But when we came back from Najashi
     (the King of Ethiopia) we greeted him (while he
     was praying) and he did not reply to us. We said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! We used to greet you in the
     past and you used to reply to us." He said,
     "Verily The Mind is occupied and busy with
     more important matter during the prayer." (So
     one cannot return One's greetings.) 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 216: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     We received the news of the departure of the
     Prophet (to Medina) while we were in Yemen.
     So we went on board a ship but our ship took us
     away to An-Najashi (the Negus) in Ethiopia.
     There we met Ja'far bin Abi Talib and stayed
     with him till we came (to Medina) by the time
     when the Prophet had conquered Khaibar. The
     Prophet said, "O you people of the ship! You
     will have (the reward of) two migrations." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 217: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     When Negus died, the Prophet said, "Today a
     pious man has died. So get up and offer the
     funeral prayer for your brother Ashama 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 218: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari: 

     Allah's Apostle led the funeral prayer for the
     Negus and made us stand in rows behind him
     and I was in the second or third row. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 219: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet offered the funeral prayer for
     Ashama, the Negus, with four Takbir. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 220: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     that Allah's Apostle informed them (i.e. his
     companions) of the death of Negus, the king of
     Ethiopia, on the very day on which the latter
     died, and said, "Ask Allah's Forgiveness for your
     brother" Abu Huraira further said, "Allah's
     Apostle made them (i.e. the Muslims) stand in
     rows at the Musalla (i.e. praying place) and led
     the funeral prayer for the Negus and said four
     Takbir." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 221: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle, while going out for the battle of
     Hunain, said, "Tomorrow Allah willing, we will
     encamp at Khaif Bani Kinana where the
     pagans(of Quraish) took the oath of Kufr
     (against the Prophet i.e. to be loyal to
     heathenism, by boycotting Banu Hashim, the
     Prophet's folk, See Hadith No. 659 Vol. 2) . 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 222: 

     Narrated Al-Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib: 

     That he said to the Prophet "You have not been
     of any avail to your uncle (Abu Talib) (though)
     by Allah, he used to protect you and used to
     become angry on your behalf." The Prophet said,
     "He is in a shallow fire, and had It not been for
     me, he would have been in the bottom of the
     (Hell) Fire." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 223: 

     Narrated Al-Musaiyab: 

     When Abu Talib was in his death bed, the
     Prophet went to him while Abu Jahl was sitting
     beside him. The Prophet said, "O my uncle! Say:
     None has the right to be worshipped except
     Allah, an expression I will defend your case with,
     before Allah." Abu Jahl and 'Abdullah bin Umaya
     said, "O Abu Talib! Will you leave the religion of
     'Abdul Muttalib?" So they kept on saying this to
     him so that the last statement he said to them
     (before he died) was: "I am on the religion of
     'Abdul Muttalib." Then the Prophet said, " I will
     keep on asking for Allah's Forgiveness for you
     unless I am forbidden to do so." Then the
     following Verse was revealed:-- 

     "It is not fitting for the Prophet and the believers
     to ask Allah's Forgiveness for the pagans, even if
     they were their near relatives, after it has become
     clear to them that they are the dwellers of the
     (Hell) Fire." (9.113) 

     The other Verse was also revealed:-- "(O
     Prophet!) Verily, you guide not whom you like,
     but Allah guides whom He will ......." (28.56) 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 224: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     That he heard the Prophet when somebody
     mentioned his uncle (i.e. Abu Talib), saying,
     "Perhaps my intercession will be helpful to him on
     the Day of Resurrection so that he may be put in
     a shallow fire reaching only up to his ankles. His
     brain will boil from it." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 225: 

     Narrated Yazid: 

     (as above, Hadith 224) using the words: "will
     make his brain boil." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 226: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, "When the
     people of Quraish did not believe me (i.e. the
     story of my Night Journey), I stood up in Al-Hijr
     and Allah displayed Jerusalem in front of me, and
     I began describing it to them while I was looking
     at it." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 227: 

     Narrated Abbas bin Malik: 

     Malik bin Sasaa said that Allah's Apostle
     described to them his Night Journey saying,
     "While I was lying in Al-Hatim or Al-Hijr,
     suddenly someone came to me and cut my body
     open from here to here." I asked Al-Jarud who
     was by my side, "What does he mean?" He said,
     "It means from his throat to his pubic area," or
     said, "From the top of the chest." The Prophet
     further said, "He then took out my heart. Then a
     gold tray of Belief was brought to me and my
     heart was washed and was filled (with Belief)
     and then returned to its original place. Then a
     white animal which was smaller than a mule and
     bigger than a donkey was brought to me." (On
     this Al-Jarud asked, "Was it the Buraq, O Abu
     Hamza?" I (i.e. Anas) replied in the affirmative).
     The Prophet said, "The animal's step (was so
     wide that it) reached the farthest point within the
     reach of the animal's sight. I was carried on it,
     and Gabriel set out with me till we reached the
     nearest heaven. 

     When he asked for the gate to be opened, it was
     asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel answered, 'Gabriel.' It
     was asked, 'Who is accompanying you?' Gabriel
     replied, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has
     Muhammad been called?' Gabriel replied in the
     affirmative. Then it was said, 'He is welcomed.
     What an excellent visit his is!' The gate was
     opened, and when I went over the first heaven, I
     saw Adam there. Gabriel said (to me). 'This is
     your father, Adam; pay him your greetings.' So I
     greeted him and he returned the greeting to me
     and said, 'You are welcomed, O pious son and
     pious Prophet.' Then Gabriel ascended with me
     till we reached the second heaven. Gabriel asked
     for the gate to be opened. It was asked, 'Who is
     it?' Gabriel answered, 'Gabriel.' It was asked,
     'Who is accompanying you?' Gabriel replied,
     'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been
     called?' Gabriel answered in the affirmative. Then
     it was said, 'He is welcomed. What an excellent
     visit his is!' The gate was opened. 

     When I went over the second heaven, there I
     saw Yahya (i.e. John) and 'Isa (i.e. Jesus) who
     were cousins of each other. Gabriel said (to me),
     'These are John and Jesus; pay them your
     greetings.' So I greeted them and both of them
     returned my greetings to me and said, 'You are
     welcomed, O pious brother and pious Prophet.'
     Then Gabriel ascended with me to the third
     heaven and asked for its gate to be opened. It
     was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel replied, 'Gabriel.'
     It was asked, 'Who is accompanying you?'
     Gabriel replied, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has
     he been called?' Gabriel replied in the affirmative.
     Then it was said, 'He is welcomed, what an
     excellent visit his is!' The gate was opened, and
     when I went over the third heaven there I saw
     Joseph. Gabriel said (to me), 'This is Joseph; pay
     him your greetings.' So I greeted him and he
     returned the greeting to me and said, 'You are
     welcomed, O pious brother and pious Prophet.'
     Then Gabriel ascended with me to the fourth
     heaven and asked for its gate to be opened. It
     was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel replied, 'Gabriel'
     It was asked, 'Who is accompanying you?'
     Gabriel replied, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has
     he been called?' Gabriel replied in the affirmative.
     Then it was said, 'He is welcomed, what an excel
     lent visit his is!' 

     The gate was opened, and when I went over the
     fourth heaven, there I saw Idris. Gabriel said (to
     me), 'This is Idris; pay him your greetings.' So I
     greeted him and he returned the greeting to me
     and said, 'You are welcomed, O pious brother
     and pious Prophet.' Then Gabriel ascended with
     me to the fifth heaven and asked for its gate to be
     opened. It was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel
     replied, 'Gabriel.' It was asked. 'Who is
     accompanying you?' Gabriel replied,
     'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been
     called?' Gabriel replied in the affirmative. Then it
     was said He is welcomed, what an excellent visit
     his is! So when I went over the fifth heaven, there
     I saw Harun (i.e. Aaron), Gabriel said, (to me).
     This is Aaron; pay him your greetings.' I greeted
     him and he returned the greeting to me and said,
     'You are welcomed, O pious brother and pious
     Prophet.' Then Gabriel ascended with me to the
     sixth heaven and asked for its gate to be opened.
     It was asked. 'Who is it?' Gabriel replied,
     'Gabriel.' It was asked, 'Who is accompanying
     you?' Gabriel replied, 'Muhammad.' It was
     asked, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel replied in
     the affirmative. It was said, 'He is welcomed.
     What an excellent visit his is!' 

     When I went (over the sixth heaven), there I saw
     Moses. Gabriel said (to me),' This is Moses; pay
     him your greeting. So I greeted him and he
     returned the greetings to me and said, 'You are
     welcomed, O pious brother and pious Prophet.'
     When I left him (i.e. Moses) he wept. Someone
     asked him, 'What makes you weep?' Moses
     said, 'I weep because after me there has been
     sent (as Prophet) a young man whose followers
     will enter Paradise in greater numbers than my
     followers.' Then Gabriel ascended with me to the
     seventh heaven and asked for its gate to be
     opened. It was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel
     replied, 'Gabriel.' It was asked,' Who is
     accompanying you?' Gabriel replied,
     'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been
     called?' Gabriel replied in the affirmative. Then it
     was said, 'He is welcomed. What an excellent
     visit his is!' 

     So when I went (over the seventh heaven), there
     I saw Abraham. Gabriel said (to me), 'This is
     your father; pay your greetings to him.' So I
     greeted him and he returned the greetings to me
     and said, 'You are welcomed, O pious son and
     pious Prophet.' Then I was made to ascend to
     Sidrat-ul-Muntaha (i.e. the Lote Tree of the
     utmost boundary) Behold! Its fruits were like the
     jars of Hajr (i.e. a place near Medina) and its
     leaves were as big as the ears of elephants.
     Gabriel said, 'This is the Lote Tree of the utmost
     boundary) . Behold ! There ran four rivers, two
     were hidden and two were visible, I asked,
     'What are these two kinds of rivers, O Gabriel?'
     He replied,' As for the hidden rivers, they are
     two rivers in Paradise and the visible rivers are
     the Nile and the Euphrates.' 

     Then Al-Bait-ul-Ma'mur (i.e. the Sacred House)
     was shown to me and a container full of wine and
     another full of milk and a third full of honey were
     brought to me. I took the milk. Gabriel
     remarked, 'This is the Islamic religion which you
     and your followers are following.' Then the
     prayers were enjoined on me: They were fifty
     prayers a day. When I returned, I passed by
     Moses who asked (me), 'What have you been
     ordered to do?' I replied, 'I have been ordered
     to offer fifty prayers a day.' Moses said, 'Your
     followers cannot bear fifty prayers a day, and by
     Allah, I have tested people before you, and I
     have tried my level best with Bani Israel (in vain).
     Go back to your Lord and ask for reduction to
     lessen your followers' burden.' So I went back,
     and Allah reduced ten prayers for me. Then
     again I came to Moses, but he repeated the same
     as he had said before. Then again I went back to
     Allah and He reduced ten more prayers. When I
     came back to Moses he said the same, I went
     back to Allah and He ordered me to observe ten
     prayers a day. When I came back to Moses, he
     repeated the same advice, so I went back to
     Allah and was ordered to observe five prayers a
     day. 

     When I came back to Moses, he said, 'What
     have you been ordered?' I replied, 'I have been
     ordered to observe five prayers a day.' He said,
     'Your followers cannot bear five prayers a day,
     and no doubt, I have got an experience of the
     people before you, and I have tried my level best
     with Bani Israel, so go back to your Lord and
     ask for reduction to lessen your follower's
     burden.' I said, 'I have requested so much of my
     Lord that I feel ashamed, but I am satisfied now
     and surrender to Allah's Order.' When I left, I
     heard a voice saying, 'I have passed My Order
     and have lessened the burden of My
     Worshipers." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 228: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Regarding the Statement of Allah" 

     "And We granted the vision (Ascension to the
     heavens) which We made you see (as an actual
     eye witness) was only made as a trial for the
     people." (17.60) 

     Ibn Abbas added: The sights which Allah's
     Apostle was shown on the Night Journey when
     he was taken to Bait-ulMaqdis (i.e. Jerusalem)
     were actual sights, (not dreams). And the Cursed
     Tree (mentioned) in the Quran is the tree of
     Zaqqum (itself) . 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 229: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ka'b: 

     Who was Kab's guide when Ka'b turned blind: I
     heard Ka'b bin Malik narrating: When he
     remained behind (i.e. did not Join) the Prophet in
     the Ghazwa of Tabuk. Ibn Bukair, in his
     narration stated that Ka'b said, " I witnessed the
     Al-'Aqaba pledge of allegiance at night with the
     Prophet when we jointly agreed to support Islam
     with all our efforts I would not like to have
     attended the Badr battle instead of that 'Aqaba
     pledge although Badr is more well-known than it,
     amongst the people." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 230: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     I was present with my two maternal uncles at
     Al-'Aqaba (where the pledge of allegiance was
     given). (Ibn 'Uyaina said, "One of the two was
     Al-Bara' bin Marur.") 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 231: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     My father, my two maternal uncles and I were
     among those who took part in the 'Aqaba
     Pledge. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 232: 

     Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit: 

     Who had taken part in the battle of Badr with
     Allah's Apostle and had been amongst his
     companions on the night of Al-'Aqaba Pledge:
     Allah's Apostle, surrounded by a group of his
     companions said, "Come along and give me the
     pledge of allegiance that you will not worship
     anything besides Allah, will not steal, will not
     commit illegal sexual intercourse will not kill your
     children, will not utter; slander, invented by
     yourself, and will not disobey me if I order you to
     do something good. Whoever among you will
     respect and fulfill this pledge, will be rewarded
     by Allah. And if one of you commits any of these
     sins and is punished in this world then that will be
     his expiation for it, and if one of you commits any
     of these sins and Allah screens his sin, then his
     matter, will rest with Allah: If He will, He will
     punish him and if He will,. He will excuse him."
     So I gave the pledge of allegiance to him for
     these conditions. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 233: 

     Narrated 'Ubada bin As Samit: 

     I was one of the Naqibs who gave the ('Aqaba)
     Pledge of Allegiance to Allah's Apostle . We
     gave the pledge of allegiance to him that we
     would not worship anything other than Allah,
     would not steal, would not commit illegal sexual
     intercourse, would not kill a person whose killing
     Allah has made illegal except rightfully, would not
     rob each other, and we would not be promised
     Paradise jf we did the above sins, then if we
     committed one of the above sins, Allah will give
     His Judgment concerning it. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 234: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The Prophet engaged me when I was a girl of six
     (years). We went to Medina and stayed at the
     home of Bani-al-Harith bin Khazraj. Then I got ill
     and my hair fell down. Later on my hair grew
     (again) and my mother, Um Ruman, came to me
     while I was playing in a swing with some of my
     girl friends. She called me, and I went to her, not
     knowing what she wanted to do to me. She
     caught me by the hand and made me stand at the
     door of the house. I was breathless then, and
     when my breathing became Allright, she took
     some water and rubbed my face and head with
     it. Then she took me into the house. There in the
     house I saw some Ansari women who said,
     "Best wishes and Allah's Blessing and a good
     luck." Then she entrusted me to them and they
     prepared me (for the marriage). Unexpectedly
     Allah's Apostle came to me in the forenoon and
     my mother handed me over to him, and at that
     time I was a girl of nine years of age. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 235: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     That the Prophet said to her, "You have been
     shown to me twice in my dream. I saw you
     pictured on a piece of silk and some-one said (to
     me). 'This is your wife.' When I uncovered the
     picture, I saw that it was yours. I said, 'If this is
     from Allah, it will be done." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 236: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     Khadija died three years before the Prophet
     departed to Medina. He stayed there for two
     years or so and then he married 'Aisha when she
     was a girl of six years of age, and he consumed
     that marriage when she was nine years old. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 237: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     We visited Khabbaba who said, "We migrated
     with the Prophet for Allah's Sake, so our reward
     became due and sure with Allah. Some of us
     passed away without taking anything of their
     rewards (in this world) and one of them was
     Mus'ab bin 'Umar who was martyred on the day
     (of the battle) of Uhud leaving a striped woolen
     cloak. When we covered his head with it, his feet
     became naked, and when covered his feet, his
     head became naked. 

     So Allah's Apostle ordered us to cover his head
     and put some Idhkhir (i.e. a special kind of
     grass) on his feet. (On the other hand) some of
     us have had their fruits ripened (in this world) and
     they are collecting them." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 238: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "The reward of
     deeds depends on the intentions, so whoever
     emigrated for the worldly benefits or to marry a
     woman, his emigration was for that for which he
     emigrated, but whoever emigrated for the Sake
     of Allah and His Apostle, his emigration is for
     Allah and His Apostle." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 239: 

     Narrated Mujahid bin Jabir Al-Makki: 

     Abdullah bin 'Umar used to say, "There is no
     more Hijrah (i.e. migration) after the Conquest of
     Mecca." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 240: 

     Narrated 'Ata bin Abi Rabah: 

     'Ubaid bin 'Umar Al-Laithi and I visited Aisha
     and asked her about the Hijra (i.e. migration),
     and she said, "Today there is no (Hijrah)
     emigration. A believer used to run away with his
     religion to Allah and His Apostle lest he should
     be put to trial because of his religion. Today
     Allah has made Islam triumphant, and today a
     believer can worship his Lord wherever he likes.
     But the deeds that are still rewardable (in place
     of emigration) are Jihad and good intentions."
     (See Hadith No. 42 Vol. 4). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 241: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Sad said, "O Allah! You know that there is none
     against whom I am eager to fight more willingly
     for Your Cause than those people who
     disbelieved Your Apostle and drove him out (of
     his city). O Allah! I think that You have ended
     the fight between us and them." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 242: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle started receiving the Divine
     Inspiration at the age of forty. Then he stayed in
     Mecca for thirteen years, receiving the Divine
     Revelation. Then he was ordered to migrate and
     he lived as an Emigrant for ten years and then
     died at the age of sixty-three (years). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 243: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle stayed in Mecca for thirteen
     years (after receiving the first Divine Inspiration)
     and died at the age of sixty-three. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 244: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle sat on the pulpit and said, "Allah
     has given one of His Slaves the choice of
     receiving the splendor and luxury of the worldly
     life whatever he likes or to accept the good (of
     the Hereafter) which is with Allah. So he has
     chosen that good which is with Allah." On that
     Abu Bakr wept and said, "Our fathers and
     mothers be sacrificed for you." We became
     astonished at this. The people said, "Look at this
     old man! Allah's Apostle talks about a Slave of
     Allah to whom He has given the option to choose
     either the splendor of this worldly life or the good
     which is with Him, while he says. 'our fathers and
     mothers be sacrifice(i for you." But it was Allah's
     Apostle who had been given option, and Abu
     Bakr knew it better than we. Allah's Apostle
     added, "No doubt, I am indebted to Abu Bakr
     more than to anybody else regarding both his
     companionship and his wealth. And if I had to
     take a Khalil from my followers, I would
     certainly have taken Abu Bakr, but the fraternity
     of Islam is. sufficient. Let no door (i.e. Khoukha)
     of the Mosque remain open, except the door of
     Abu Bakr." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 245: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) I never remembered my
     parents believing in any religion other than the
     true religion (i.e. Islam), and (I don't remember)
     a single day passing without our being visited by
     Allah's Apostle in the morning and in the evening.
     When the Muslims were put to test (i.e. troubled
     by the pagans), Abu Bakr set out migrating to the
     land of Ethiopia, and when he reached
     Bark-al-Ghimad, Ibn Ad-Daghina, the chief of
     the tribe of Qara, met him and said, "O Abu
     Bakr! Where are you going?" Abu Bakr replied,
     "My people have turned me out (of my country),
     so I want to wander on the earth and worship my
     Lord." Ibn Ad-Daghina said, "O Abu Bakr! A
     man like you should not leave his home-land, nor
     should he be driven out, because you help the
     destitute, earn their livings, and you keep good
     relations with your Kith and kin, help the weak
     and poor, entertain guests generously, and help
     the calamity-stricken persons. Therefore I am
     your protector. Go back and worship your Lord
     in your town." 

     So Abu Bakr returned and Ibn Ad-Daghina
     accompanied him. In the evening Ibn
     Ad-Daghina visited the nobles of Quraish and
     said to them. "A man like Abu Bakr should not
     leave his homeland, nor should he be driven out.
     Do you (i.e. Quraish) drive out a man who helps
     the destitute, earns their living, keeps good
     relations with his Kith and kin, helps the weak
     and poor, entertains guests generously and helps
     the calamity-stricken persons?" So the people of
     Quraish could not refuse Ibn Ad-Daghina's
     protection, and they said to Ibn Ad-Daghina,
     "Let Abu Bakr worship his Lord in his house. He
     can pray and recite there whatever he likes, but
     he should not hurt us with it, and should not do it
     publicly, because we are afraid that he may affect
     our women and children." Ibn Ad-Daghina told
     Abu Bakr of all that. Abu Bakr stayed in that
     state, worshipping his Lord in his house. He did
     not pray publicly, nor did he recite Quran outside
     his house. 

     Then a thought occurred to Abu Bakr to build a
     mosque in front of his house, and there he used
     to pray and recite the Quran. The women and
     children of the pagans began to gather around
     him in great number. They used to wonder at him
     and look at him. Abu Bakr was a man who used
     to weep too much, and he could not help
     weeping on reciting the Quran. That situation
     scared the nobles of the pagans of Quraish, so
     they sent for Ibn Ad-Daghina. When he came to
     them, they said, "We accepted your protection of
     Abu Bakr on condition that he should worship
     his Lord in his house, but he has violated the
     conditions and he has built a mosque in front of
     his house where he prays and recites the Quran
     publicly. We are now afraid that he may affect
     our women and children unfavorably. So,
     prevent him from that. If he likes to confine the
     worship of his Lord to his house, he may do so,
     but if he insists on doing that openly, ask him to
     release you from your obligation to protect him,
     for we dislike to break our pact with you, but we
     deny Abu Bakr the right to announce his act
     publicly." Ibn Ad-Daghina went to Abu- Bakr
     and said, ("O Abu Bakr!) You know well what
     contract I have made on your behalf; now, you
     are either to abide by it, or else release me from
     my obligation of protecting you, because I do not
     want the 'Arabs hear that my people have
     dishonored a contract I have made on behalf of
     another man." Abu Bakr replied, "I release you
     from your pact to protect me, and am pleased
     with the protection from Allah." 

     At that time the Prophet was in Mecca, and he
     said to the Muslims, "In a dream I have been
     shown your migration place, a land of date palm
     trees, between two mountains, the two stony
     tracts." So, some people migrated to Medina,
     and most of those people who had previously
     migrated to the land of Ethiopia, returned to
     Medina. Abu Bakr also prepared to leave for
     Medina, but Allah's Apostle said to him, "Wait
     for a while, because I hope that I will be allowed
     to migrate also." Abu Bakr said, "Do you indeed
     expect this? Let my father be sacrificed for you!"
     The Prophet said, "Yes." So Abu Bakr did not
     migrate for the sake of Allah's Apostle in order
     to accompany him. He fed two she-camels he
     possessed with the leaves of As-Samur tree that
     fell on being struck by a stick for four months. 

     One day, while we were sitting in Abu Bakr's
     house at noon, someone said to Abu Bakr, "This
     is Allah's Apostle with his head covered coming
     at a time at which he never used to visit us
     before." Abu Bakr said, "May my parents be
     sacrificed for him. By Allah, he has not come at
     this hour except for a great necessity." So Allah's
     Apostle came and asked permission to enter,
     and he was allowed to enter. When he entered,
     he said to Abu Bakr. "Tell everyone who is
     present with you to go away." Abu Bakr replied,
     "There are none but your family. May my father
     be sacrificed for you, O Allah's Apostle!" The
     Prophet said, "i have been given permission to
     migrate." Abu Bakr said, "Shall I accompany
     you? May my father be sacrificed for you, O
     Allah's Apostle!" Allah's Apostle said, "Yes."
     Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's Apostle! May my
     father be sacrificed for you, take one of these
     two she-camels of mine." Allah's Apostle replied,
     "(I will accept it) with payment." So we prepared
     the baggage quickly and put some journey food
     in a leather bag for them. Asma, Abu Bakr's
     daughter, cut a piece from her waist belt and tied
     the mouth of the leather bag with it, and for that
     reason she was named Dhat-un-Nitaqain (i.e. the
     owner of two belts). 

     Then Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr reached a
     cave on the mountain of Thaur and stayed there
     for three nights. 'Abdullah bin Abi Bakr who was
     intelligent and a sagacious youth, used to stay
     (with them) aver night. He used to leave them
     before day break so that in the morning he would
     be with Quraish as if he had spent the night in
     Mecca. He would keep in mind any plot made
     against them, and when it became dark he would
     (go and) inform them of it. 'Amir bin Fuhaira, the
     freed slave of Abu Bakr, used to bring the milch
     sheep (of his master, Abu Bakr) to them a little
     while after nightfall in order to rest the sheep
     there. So they always had fresh milk at night, the
     milk of their sheep, and the milk which they
     warmed by throwing heated stones in it. 'Amir
     bin Fuhaira would then call the herd away when
     it was still dark (before daybreak). He did the
     same in each of those three nights. Allah's
     Apostle and Abu Bakr had hired a man from the
     tribe of Bani Ad-Dail from the family of Bani
     Abd bin Adi as an expert guide, and he was in
     alliance with the family of Al-'As bin Wail
     As-Sahmi and he was on the religion of the
     infidels of Quraish. The Prophet and Abu Bakr
     trusted him and gave him their two she-camels
     and took his promise to bring their two she
     camels to the cave of the mountain of Thaur in
     the morning after three nights later. And (when
     they set out), 'Amir bin Fuhaira and the guide
     went along with them and the guide led them
     along the sea-shore. 

     The nephew of Suraqa bin Ju'sham said that his
     father informed him that he heard Suraqa bin
     Ju'sham saying, "The messengers of the heathens
     of Quraish came to us declaring that they had
     assigned for the persons why would kill or arrest
     Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr, a reward equal to
     their bloodmoney. While I was sitting in one of
     the gatherings of my tribe. Bani Mudlij, a man
     from them came to us and stood up while we
     were sitting, and said, "O Suraqa! No doubt, I
     have just seen some people far away on the
     seashore, and I think they are Muhammad and
     his companions." Suraqa added, "I too realized
     that it must have been they. But I said 'No, it is
     not they, but you have seen so-and-so, and
     so-and-so whom we saw set out.' I stayed in the
     gathering for a while and then got up and left for
     my home. and ordered my slave-girl to get my
     horse which was behind a hillock, and keep it
     ready for me. 

     Then I took my spear and left by the back door
     of my house dragging the lower end of the spear
     on the ground and keeping it low. Then I reached
     my horse, mounted it and made it gallop. When I
     approached them (i.e. Muhammad and Abu
     Bakr), my horse stumbled and I fell down from
     it, Then I stood up, got hold of my quiver and
     took out the divining arrows and drew lots as to
     whether I should harm them (i.e. the Prophet and
     Abu Bakr) or not, and the lot which I disliked
     came out. But I remounted my horse and let it
     gallop, giving no importance to the divining
     arrows. When I heard the recitation of the Quran
     by Allah's Apostle who did not look hither and
     thither while Abu Bakr was doing it often,
     suddenly the forelegs of my horse sank into the
     ground up to the knees, and I fell down from it.
     Then I rebuked it and it got up but could hardly
     take out its forelegs from the ground, and when it
     stood up straight again, its fore-legs caused dust
     to rise up in the sky like smoke. Then again I
     drew lots with the divining arrows, and the lot
     which I disliked, came out. So I called upon
     them to feel secure. They stopped, and I
     remounted my horse and went to them. When I
     saw how I had been hampered from harming
     them, it came to my mind that the cause of
     Allah's Apostle (i.e. Islam) will become
     victorious. So I said to him, "Your people have
     assigned a reward equal to the bloodmoney for
     your head." Then I told them all the plans the
     people of Mecca had made concerning them.
     Then I offered them some journey food and
     goods but they refused to take anything and did
     not ask for anything, but the Prophet said, "Do
     not tell others about us." Then I requested him to
     write for me a statement of security and peace.
     He ordered 'Amr bin Fuhaira who wrote it for
     me on a parchment, and then Allah's Apostle
     proceeded on his way. 

     Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: Allah's Apostle
     met Az-Zubair in a caravan of Muslim merchants
     who were returning from Sham. Az-Zubair
     provided Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr with
     white clothes to wear. When the Muslims of
     Medina heard the news of the departure of
     Allah's Apostle from Mecca (towards Medina),
     they started going to the Harra every morning .
     They would wait for him till the heat of the noon
     forced them to return. One day, after waiting for
     a long while, they returned home, and when they
     went into their houses, a Jew climbed up the roof
     of one of the forts of his people to look for some
     thing, and he saw Allah's Apostle and his
     companions dressed in white clothes, emerging
     out of the desert mirage. 

     The Jew could not help shouting at the top of his
     voice, "O you 'Arabs! Here is your great man
     whom you have been waiting for!" So all the
     Muslims rushed to their arms and received
     Allah's Apostle on the summit of Harra. The
     Prophet turned with them to the right and alighted
     at the quarters of Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf, and this
     was on Monday in the month of Rabi-ul-Awal.
     Abu Bakr stood up, receiving the people while
     Allah's Apostle sat down and kept silent. Some
     of the Ansar who came and had not seen Allah's
     Apostle before, began greeting Abu Bakr, but
     when the sunshine fell on Allah's Apostle and
     Abu Bakr came forward and shaded him with his
     sheet only then the people came to know Allah's
     Apostle. Allah's Apostle stayed with Bani 'Amr
     bin 'Auf for ten nights and established the
     mosque (mosque of Quba) which was founded
     on piety. Allah's Apostle prayed in it and then
     mounted his she-camel and proceeded on,
     accompanied by the people till his she-camel
     knelt down at (the place of) the Mosque of
     Allah's Apostle at Medina. Some Muslims used
     to pray there in those days, and that place was a
     yard for drying dates belonging to Suhail and
     Sahl, the orphan boys who were under the
     guardianship of 'Asad bin Zurara. When his
     she-camel knelt down, Allah's Apostle said,
     "This place, Allah willing, will be our abiding
     place." Allah's Apostle then called the two boys
     and told them to suggest a price for that yard so
     that he might take it as a mosque. The two boys
     said, "No, but we will give it as a gift, O Allah's
     Apostle!" Allah's Apostle then built a mosque
     there. The Prophet himself started carrying
     unburnt bricks for its building and while doing so,
     he was saying "This load is better than the load of
     Khaibar, for it is more pious in the Sight of Allah
     and purer and better rewardable." He was also
     saying, "O Allah! The actual reward is the
     reward in the Hereafter, so bestow Your Mercy
     on the Ansar and the Emigrants." Thus the
     Prophet recited (by way of proverb) the poem of
     some Muslim poet whose name is unknown to
     me. 

     (Ibn Shibab said, "In the Hadiths it does not
     occur that Allah's Apostle 

     recited a complete poetic verse other than this
     one.") 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 246: 

     Narrated Asma: 

     I prepared the journey food for the Prophet and
     Abu Bakr when they wanted (to migrate to)
     Medina. I said to my father (Abu Bakr), "I do
     not have anything to tie the container of the
     journey food with except my waist belt." He said,
     "Divide it lengthwise into two." I did so, and for
     this reason I was named 'Dhat-un-Nitaqain' (i.e.
     the owner of two belts). (Ibn 'Abbas said,
     "Asma', Dhat-un-Nitaq.") 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 247: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     When the Prophet migrated to Medina, Suraqa
     bin Malik bin Ju'sham pursued him. The Prophet
     invoked evil on him, therefore the forelegs of his
     horse sank into the ground. Suraqa said (to the
     Prophet ), "Invoke Allah to rescue me, and I will
     not harm you. "The Prophet invoked Allah for
     him. Then Allah's Apostle felt thirsty and he
     passed by a shepherd. Abu Bakr said, "I took a
     bowl and milked a little milk in it and brought it to
     the Prophet and he drank till I was pleased." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 248: 

     Narrated Asma: 

     That she conceived 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair. She
     added, "I migrated to Medina while I was at full
     term of pregnancy and alighted at Quba where I
     gave birth to him. Then I brought him to the
     Prophet and put him in his lap. The Prophet
     asked for a date, chewed it, and put some of its
     juice in the child's mouth. So, the first thing that
     entered the child's stomach was the saliva of
     Allah's Apostle. Then the Prophet rubbed the
     child's palate with a date and invoked for Allah's
     Blessings on him, and he was the first child born
     amongst the Emigrants in the Islamic Land (i.e.
     Medina). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 249: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The first child who was born in the Islamic Land
     (i.e. Medina) amongst the Emigrants, was
     'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair. They brought him to the
     Prophet. The Prophet took a date, and after
     chewing it, put its juice in his mouth. So the first
     thing that went into the child's stomach, was the
     saliva of the Prophet 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 250: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle arrived at Medina with Abu
     Bakr, riding behind him on the same camel. Abu
     Bakr was an elderly man known to the people,
     while Allah's Apostle was a youth that was
     unknown. Thus, if a man met Abu Bakr, he
     would day, "O Abu Bakr! Who is this man in
     front of you?" Abu Bakr would say, "This man
     shows me the Way," One would think that Abu
     Bakr meant the road, while in fact, Abu Bakr
     meant the way of virtue and good. Then Abu
     Bakr looked behind and saw a horse-rider
     persuing them. He said, "O Allah's Apostle! This
     is a horse-rider persuing us." The Prophet looked
     behind and said, "O Allah! Cause him to fall
     down." So the horse threw him down and got up
     neighing. After that the rider, Suraqa said, "O
     Allah's Prophet! Order me whatever you want."
     The Prophet said, "Stay where you are and do
     not allow anybody to reach us." So, in the first
     part of the day Suraqa was an enemy of Allah's
     Prophet and in the last part of it, he was a
     protector. Then Allah's Apostle alighted by the
     side of the Al-Harra and sent a message to the
     Ansar, and they came to Allah's Prophet and
     Abu Bakr, and having greeted them, they said,
     "Ride (your she-camels) safe and obeyed."
     Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr rode and the
     Ansar, carrying their arms, surrounded them. The
     news that Allah's Prophet had come circulated in
     Medina. The people came out and were eagerly
     looking and saying "Allah's Prophet has come!
     Allah's Prophet has come! So the Prophet went
     on till he alighted near the house of Abu Aiyub.
     While the Prophet was speaking with the family
     members of Abu Aiyub, 'Abdullah bin Salam
     heard the news of his arrival while he himself was
     picking the dates for his family from his family
     garden. He hurried to the Prophet carrying the
     dates which he had collected for his family from
     the garden. He listened to Allah's Prophet and
     then went home. 

     Then Allah's Prophet said, "Which is the nearest
     of the houses of our Kith and kin?" Abu Aiyub
     replied, "Mine, O Allah's Prophet! This is my
     house and this is my gate." The Prophet said,
     "Go and prepare a place for our midday rest."
     Abu Aiyub said, "Get up (both of you) with
     Allah's Blessings." So when Allah's Prophet went
     into the house, 'Abdullah bin Salaim came and
     said "I testify that you (i.e. Muhammad) are
     Apostle of Allah and that you have come with the
     Truth. The Jews know well that I am their chief
     and the son of their chief and the most learned
     amongst them and the son of the most learned
     amongst them. So send for them (i.e. Jews) and
     ask them about me before they know that I have
     embraced Islam, for if they know that they will
     say about me things which are not correct." So
     Allah's Apostle sent for them, and they came and
     entered. Allah's Apostle said to them, "O (the
     group of) Jews! Woe to you: be afraid of Allah.
     By Allah except Whom none has the right to be
     worshipped, you people know for certain, that I
     am Apostle of Allah and that I have come to you
     with the Truth, so embrace Islam." The Jews
     replied, "We do not know this." So they said this
     to the Prophet and he repeated it thrice. Then he
     said, "What sort of a man is 'Abdullah bin Salam
     amongst you?" They said, "He is our chief and
     the son of our chief and the most learned man,
     and the son of the most learned amongst us." He
     said, "What would you think if he should
     embrace Islam?" They said, "Allah forbid! He
     can not embrace Islam." He said, " What would
     you think if he should embrace Islam?" They
     said, "Allah forbid! He can not embrace Islam."
     He said, "What would you think if he should
     embrace Islam?" They said, "Allah forbid! He
     can not embrace Islam." He said, "O Ibn Salaim!
     Come out to them." He came out and said, "O
     (the group of) Jews! 8e afraid of Allah except
     Whom none has the right to be worshipped. You
     know for certain that he is Apostle of Allah and
     that he has brought a True Religion!' They said,
     "You tell a lie." On that Allah's Apostle turned
     them out. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 251: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Umar bin Al-Khattab fixed a grant of 4000
     (Dirhams) for every Early Emigrant (i.e. Muhajir)
     and fixed a grant of 3500 (Dirhams) only for Ibn
     'Umar. Somebody said to 'Umar, "Ibn 'Umar is
     also one of the Early Emigrants; why do you give
     him less than four-thousand?" 'Umar replied, "His
     parents took him with them when they migrated,
     so he was not like the one who had migrated by
     himself. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 252: 

     Narrated Khabbab: 

     We migrated with Allah's Apostle (See Hadith
     No. 253 below). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 253: 

     Narrated Khabbab: 

     We migrated with Allah's Apostle seeking Allah's
     Countenance, so our rewards became due and
     sure with Allah. Some of us passed away without
     eating anything of their rewards in this world.
     One of these was Mus'ab bin 'Umar who was
     martyred on the day of the battle of Uhud. We
     did not find anything to shroud his body with
     except a striped cloak. When we covered his
     head with it, his feet remained uncovered, and
     when we covered his feet with it, his head
     remained uncovered. So Allah's Apostle ordered
     us to cover his head with it and put some Idhkhir
     (i.e. a kind of grass) over his feet. And there are
     some amongst us whose fruits have ripened and
     they are collecting them (i.e. they have received
     their rewards in this world). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 254: 

     Narrated Abu Burda Bin Abi Musa Al-Ashari: 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar said to me, "Do you know
     what my father said to your father once?" I said,
     "No." He said, "My father said to your father, 'O
     Abu Musa, will it please you that we will be
     rewarded for our conversion to Islam with
     Allah's Apostle and our migration with him, and
     our Jihad with him and all our good deeds which
     we did, with him, and that all the deeds we did
     after his death will be disregarded whether good
     or bad?' Your father (i.e. Abu Musa) said, 'No,
     by Allah, we took part in Jihad after Allah's
     Apostle , prayed and did plenty of good deeds,
     and many people have embraced Islam at our
     hands, and no doubt, we expect rewards from
     Allah for these good deeds.' On that my father
     (i.e. 'Umar) said, 'As for myself, By Him in
     Whose Hand 'Umar's soul is, I wish that the
     deeds done by us at the time of the Prophet
     remain rewardable while whatsoever we did after
     the death of the Prophet be enough to save us
     from Punishment in that the good deeds
     compensate for the bad ones.' " On that I said
     (to Ibn 'Umar), "By Allah, your father was better
     than my father!" 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 255: 

     Narrated Abu 'Uthman: 

     I heard that Ibn 'Umar used to become angry if
     someone mentioned that he had migrated before
     his father ('Umar), and he used to say, " 'Umar
     and I came to Allah's Apostle and found him
     having his midday rest, so we returned home.
     Then 'Umar sent me again (to the Prophet ) and
     said, 'Go and see whether he is awake.' I went to
     him and entered his place and gave him the
     pledge of allegiance. Then I went back to 'Umar
     and informed him that the Prophet was awake.
     So we both went, running slowly, and when
     'Umar entered his place, he gave him the pledge
     of allegiance and thereafter I too gave him the
     pledge of allegiance," 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 256: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     Abu Bakr bought a (camel's) saddle from 'Azib,
     and I carried it for him. 'Azib (i.e. my father)
     asked Abu Bakr regarding the journey of the
     migration of Allah's Apostle. Abu Bakr said,
     "Close observers were appointed by our enemies
     to watch us. So we went out at night and
     travelled throughout the night and the following
     day till it was noon, then we perceived a rock
     and went towards it, and there was some shade
     under it. I spread a cloak I had with me for
     Allah's Apostle and then the Prophet layed on it.
     I went out to guard him and all of a sudden I saw
     a shepherd coming with his sheep looking for the
     same, the shade of the rock as we did, I asked
     him, 'O boy, to whom do you belong?' He
     replied, 'I belong to so-and-so.' I asked him, 'Is
     there some milk in your sheep?' He replied in the
     affirmative. I asked him, 'Will you milk?' He
     replied in the affirmative. Then he got hold of one
     of his sheep. I said to him, 'Remove the dust
     from its udder.' Then he milked a little milk. I had
     a water-skin with me which was tied with a piece
     of cloth. I had prepared the water-skin for
     Allah's Apostle . So I poured some water over
     the milk (container) till its bottom became cold.
     Then I brought the milk to the Prophet and said,
     'Drink, O Allah's Apostle.' Allah's Apostle drank
     till I became pleased. Then we departed and the
     pursuers were following us." Al-Bara added: I
     then went with Abu Bakr into his home (carrying
     that saddle) and there I saw his daughter 'Aisha
     Lying in a bed because of heavy fever and I saw
     her father Abu Bakr kissing her cheek and
     saying, "How are you, little daughter?" 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 257: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     (the servant of the Prophet) When the Prophet
     arrived (at Medina), there was not a single
     companion of the Prophet who had grey and
     black hair except Abu Bakr, and he dyed his hair
     with Henna' and Katam (i.e. plants used for
     dying hair). Through another group of narrators,
     Anas bin Malik said,. "When the Prophet arrived
     at Medina, the eldest amongst his companions
     was Abu Bakr. He dyed his hair with Hinna and
     Katam till it became of dark red color. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 258: 

     Narrate Aisha: 

     Abu Bakr married a woman from the tribe of
     Bani Kalb, called Um Bakr. When Abu Bakr
     migrated to Medina, he divorced her and she
     was married by her cousin, the poet who said the
     following poem lamenting the infidels of Quraish: 

     "What is there kept in the well, The well of Badr,
     (The owners of) the trays of Roasted camel
     humps? What is there kept in the well, The well
     of Badr, (The owners of) lady singers And
     friends of the honorable companions; who used
     to drink (wine) together, Um Bakr greets us With
     the greeting of peace, But can I find peace After
     my people have gone? The Apostle tells us that
     We shall live again, But what sort of life will owls
     and skulls live?: 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 259: 

     Narrated Abu Bakr: 

     I was with the Prophet in the Cave. When I
     raised my head, I saw the feet of the people. I
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! If some of them should
     look down, they will see us." The Prophet said,
     "O Abu Bakr, be quiet! (For we are) two and
     Allah is the Third of us." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 260: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     Once a bedouin came to the Prophet and asked
     him about the migration. The Prophet said,
     "Mercy of Allah be on you! The migration is a
     quite difficult matter. Have you got some
     camels?" He replied in the affirmative. Then the
     Prophet said, "Do you give their Zakat?" He
     replied in the affirmative. The Prophet said, "Do
     you let others benefit by their milk gratis?" He
     replied in the affirmative. Then the Prophet
     asked, "Do you milk them on their watering days
     and give their milk to the poor and needy?" He
     replied in the affirmative. The Prophet, said, "Go
     on doing like this from beyond the seas, and
     there is no doubt that Allah will not overlook any
     of your good deeds." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 261: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The first people who came to us (in Medina)
     were Mus'ab bin 'Umar and Ibn Um Maktum.
     Then came to us 'Ammar bin Yasir and Bilal. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 262: 

     Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib: 

     The first people who came to us (in Medina)
     were Mus'ab bin 'Umar and Ibn Um Maktum
     who were teaching Qur'an to the people. Then
     their came Bilal. Sad and 'Ammar bin Yasir.
     After that 'Umar bin Al-Khattab came along with
     twenty other companions of the Prophet. Later
     on the Prophet himself (to Medina) and I had
     never seen the people of Medina so joyful as
     they were on the arrival of Allah's Apostle, for
     even the slave girls were saying, "Allah's Apostle
     has arrived!" And before his arrival I had read
     the Sura starting with:-- "Glorify the Name of
     your Lord, the Most High" (87.1) together with
     other Suras of Al-Mufassal. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 263: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When Allah's Apostle came to Medina, Abu
     Bakr and Bilal got fever, and I went to both of
     them and said, "O my father, how do you feel? O
     Bilal, how do you feel?" Whenever Abu Bakr's
     fever got worse, he would say, "Every man will
     meet his death once in one morning while he will
     be among his family, for death is really nearer to
     him than his leather shoe laces (to his feet)." And
     whenever fever deserted Bilal, he would say
     aloud, "Would that I know whether I shall spend
     a night in the valley (of Mecca) with Idhkhir and
     Jalil (i.e. kinds of grass) around me, and whether
     I shall drink one day the water of Mijannah, and
     whether I shall see once again the hills of Shamah
     and Tafil?" Then I went to Allah's Apostle and
     told him of that. He said, "O Allah, make us love
     Medina as much as or more than we used to love
     Mecca, O Allah, make it healthy and bless its Sa'
     and Mud (i.e. measures), and take away its fever
     to Al-Juhfa." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 264: 

     Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin Ad bin Khiyair: 

     I went to Uthman. After reciting Tashah-hud, he
     said,. "Then after no doubt, Allah sent
     Muhammad with the Truth, and I was amongst
     those who responded to the Call of Allah and
     His Prophet and believed in the message of
     Muhammad. Then took part in the two
     migrations. I became the son-in-law of Allah's
     Apostle and gave the pledge of allegiance to him
     By Allah, I never disobeyed him, nor did I
     deceive him till Allah took him unto Him." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 265: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     During the last Hajj led by 'Umar,
     'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf returned to his family at
     Mina and met me there. 'AbdurRahman said (to
     'Umar), "O chief of the believers! The season of
     Hajj is the season when there comes the scum of
     the people (besides the good amongst them), so
     I recommend that you should wait till you go
     back to Medina, for it is the place of Migration
     and Sunna (i.e. the Prophet's tradition), and there
     you will be able to refer the matter to the
     religious scholars and the nobles and the people
     of wise opinions." 'Umar said, "I will speak of it
     in Medina on my very first sermon I will deliver
     there." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 266: 

     Narrated 'Um al-'Ala: 

     An Ansari woman who gave the pledge of
     allegiance to the Prophet that the Ansar drew lots
     concerning the dwelling of the Emigrants.
     'Uthman bin Maz'un was decided to dwell with
     them (i.e. Um al-'Ala's family), 'Uthman fell ill
     and I nursed him till he died, and we covered him
     with his clothes. Then the Prophet came to us
     and I (addressing the dead body) said, "O Abu
     As-Sa'ib, may Allah's Mercy be on you! I bear
     witness that Allah has honored you." On that the
     Prophet said, "How do you know that Allah has
     honored him?" I replied, "I do not know. May
     my father and my mother be sacrificed for you,
     O Allah's Apostle! But who else is worthy of it (if
     not 'Uthman)?" He said, "As to him, by Allah,
     death has overtaken him, and I hope the best for
     him. By Allah, though I am the Apostle of Allah,
     yet I do not know what Allah will do to me," By
     Allah, I will never assert the piety of anyone after
     him. That made me sad, and when I slept I saw
     in a dream a flowing stream for 'Uthman bin
     Maz'un. I went to Allah's Apostle and told him of
     it. He remarked, "That symbolizes his (good)
     deeds." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 267: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The day of Bu'ath was a day (i.e. battle) which
     Allah caused to take place just before the
     mission of His Apostle so that when Allah's
     Apostle came to Medina, they (the tribes) had
     divided (into hostile groups) and their nobles had
     been killed; and all that facilitated their
     conversion to Islam. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 268: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     That once Abu Bakr came to her on the day of
     'Id-ul-Fitr or 'Id ul Adha while the Prophet was
     with her and there were two girl singers with her,
     singing songs of the Ansar about the day of
     Buath. Abu Bakr said twice. "Musical instrument
     of Satan!" But the Prophet said, "Leave them
     Abu Bakr, for every nation has an 'Id (i.e.
     festival) and this day is our 'Id." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 269: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     When Allah's Apostle arrived at Medina, he
     alighted at the upper part of Medina among the
     people called Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf and he stayed
     with them for fourteen nights. Then he sent for
     the chiefs of Bani An-Najjar, and they came,
     carrying their swords. As if I am just now looking
     at Allah's Apostle on his she-camel with Abu
     Bakr riding behind him (on the same camel) and
     the chiefs of Bani An-Najjar around him till he
     dismounted in the courtyard of Abu Aiyub's
     home. The Prophet used to offer the prayer
     wherever the prayer was due, and he would pray
     even in sheepfolds. Then he ordered that the
     mosque be built. He sent for the chiefs of Banu
     An-Najjar, and when they came, he said, "O
     Banu An-Najjar! Suggest to me the price of this
     garden of yours." They replied "No! By Allah,
     we do not demand its price except from Allah."
     In that garden there were the (following) things
     that I will tell you: Graves of pagans, unleveled
     land with holes and pits etc., and date-palm
     trees. Allah's Apostle ordered that the graves of
     the pagans be dug up and, the unleveled land be
     leveled and the date-palm trees be cut down.
     The trunks of the trees were arranged so as to
     form the wall facing the Qibla. The Stone pillars
     were built at the sides of its gate. The
     companions of the Prophet were carrying the
     stones and reciting some lyrics, and Allah's
     Apostle . . was with them and they were saying,
     "O Allah! There is no good Excel the good of the
     Hereafter, so bestow victory on the Ansar and
     the Emigrants. " 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 270: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Humaid Az-Zuhri: 

     I heard 'Umar bin 'Abdul-Aziz asking As-Sa'ib,
     the nephew of An-Nimr. "What have you heard
     about residing in Mecca?" The other said, "I
     heard Al-Ala bin Al-Hadrami saying, Allah's
     Apostle said: An Emigrant is allowed to stay in
     Mecca for three days after departing from Mina
     (i.e. after performing all the ceremonies of Hajj)" 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 271: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     The Prophet's companions did not take as a
     starting date for the Muslim calendar, the day,
     the Prophet had been sent as an Apostle or the
     day of his death, but the day of his arrival at
     Medina. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 272: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Originally, two Rakat were prescribed in every
     prayer. When the Prophet migrated (to Medina)
     four Rakat were enjoined, while the journey
     prayer remained unchanged(i.e. two Rakat). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 273: 

     Narrated Sad bin Malik: 

     In the year of Hajjat-ul-Wada' the Prophet
     visited me when I fell ill and was about to die
     because of that illness. I said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     I am very ill as you see, and I am a rich man and
     have no heir except my only daughter. Shall I
     give 2/3 of my property in charity?" He said,
     "No." I said, "Shall I then give one half of it in
     charity?" He said, "O Sad! Give 1/3 (in charity)
     and even 1/3 is too much. No doubt, it is better
     to leave your children rich than to leave them
     poor, reduced to begging from others. And Allah
     will reward you for whatever you spend with the
     intention of gaining Allah's Pleasure even if it
     were a mouthful of food you put into your wives
     mouth." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Am I to be
     left behind (in Mecca) after my companions have
     gone?" He said, "If you should be left behind,
     you will be upgraded and elevated for every
     deed you will do with a desire to achieve Allah's
     Pleasure. I hope that you will live long so that
     some people will benefit by you while others will
     be harmed. O Allah! Please fulfill the migration of
     my companions and do not make them turn back
     on their heels. But (we feel sorry for) the unlucky
     Sad bin Khaulah." Allah's Apostle lamented his
     death in Mecca. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 274: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When 'Abdur-Rahman bin Auf came to Medina
     and the Prophet established the bond of
     brotherhood between him and Sad bin
     Ar-Rabi-al-Ansari, Saud suggested that
     'Abdur-Rahman should accept half of his
     property and family. 'Abdur Rahman said, "May
     Allah bless you in your family and property;
     guide me to the market." So 'Abdur-Rahman
     (while doing business in the market) made some
     profit of some condensed dry yoghurt and butter.
     After a few days the Prophet saw him wearing
     clothes stained with yellow perfume. The Prophet
     asked, "What is this, O 'Abdur-Rahman?" He
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have married an
     Ansar' woman." The Prophet asked, "What have
     you given her as Mahr?" He (i.e.
     'Abdur-Rahman) said, "A piece of gold, about
     the weight of a date stone." Then the Prophet
     said, Give a banquet, even though of a sheep." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 275: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When the news of the arrival of the Prophet at
     Medina reached 'Abdullah bin Salam, he went to
     him to ask him about certain things, He said, "I
     am going to ask you about three things which
     only a Prophet can answer: What is the first sign
     of The Hour? What is the first food which the
     people of Paradise will eat? Why does a child
     attract the similarity to his father or to his
     mother?" The Prophet replied, "Gabriel has just
     now informed me of that." Ibn Salam said, "He
     (i.e. Gabriel) is the enemy of the Jews amongst
     the angels. The Prophet said, "As for the first sign
     of The Hour, it will be a fire that will collect the
     people from the East to the West. As for the first
     meal which the people of Paradise will eat, it will
     be the caudate (extra) lobe of the fish-liver. As
     for the child, if the man's discharge proceeds the
     woman's discharge, the child attracts the
     similarity to the man, and if the woman's
     discharge proceeds the man's, then the child
     attracts the similarity to the woman." 

     On this, 'Abdullah bin Salam said, "I testify that
     None has the right to be worshipped except
     Allah, and that you are the Apostle of Allah." and
     added, "O Allah's Apostle! Jews invent such lies
     as make one astonished, so please ask them
     about me before they know about my conversion
     to I slam . " The Jews came, and the Prophet
     said, "What kind of man is 'Abdullah bin Salam
     among you?" They replied, "The best of us and
     the son of the best of us and the most superior
     among us, and the son of the most superior
     among us. "The Prophet said, "What would you
     think if 'Abdullah bin Salam should embrace
     Islam?" They said, "May Allah protect him from
     that." The Prophet repeated his question and they
     gave the same answer. Then 'Abdullah came out
     to them and said, "I testify that None has the right
     to be worshipped except Allah and that
     Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah!" On this, the
     Jews said, "He is the most wicked among us and
     the son of the most wicked among us." So they
     degraded him. On this, he (i.e. 'Abdullah bin
     Salam) said, "It is this that I was afraid of, O
     Allah's Apostle. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 276: 

     Narrated Abu Al-Minhal 'AbdurRahman bin
     Mut'im: 

     A partner of mine sold some Dirhams on credit in
     the market. I said, "Glorified be Allah! Is this
     legal?" He replied, "Glorified be Allah! By Allah,
     when I sold them in the market, nobody objected
     to it." Then I asked Al-Bara' bin 'Azib (about it)
     he said, "We used to make such a transaction
     when the Prophet came to Medina. So he said,
     'There is no harm in it if it is done from hand to
     hand, but it is not allowed on credit.' Go to Zaid
     bin Al- Arqam and ask him about it for he was
     the greatest trader of all of us." So I asked Zaid
     bin Al-Arqam., and he said the same (as
     Al-Bara) did." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 277: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Had only ten Jews (amongst
     their chiefs) believe me, all the Jews would
     definitely have believed me." 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 278: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     When the Prophet arrived at Medina, he noticed
     that some people among the Jews used to
     respect Ashura' (i.e. 10th of Muharram) and fast
     on it. The Prophet then said, "We have more
     right to observe fast on this day." and ordered
     that fasting should be observed on it. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 279: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     When the Prophet arrived at Medina he found
     that the Jews observed fast on the day of
     'Ashura'. They were asked the reason for the
     fast. They replied, "This is the day when Allah
     caused Moses and the children of Israel to have
     victory over Pharaoh, so we fast on this day as a
     sign of glorifying it." Allah's Apostle said, "We
     are closer to Moses than you." Then he ordered
     that fasting on this day should be observed. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 280: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas: 

     The Prophet used to keep his hair falling loose
     while the pagans used to part their hair, and the
     People of the Scriptures used to keep their hair
     falling loose, and the Prophet liked to follow the
     People of the Scriptures in matters about which
     he had not been instructed differently, but later
     on the Prophet started parting his hair. 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 281: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     They, the people of the Scriptures, divided this
     Scripture into parts, believing in some portions of
     it and disbelieving the others. (See 15:91) 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 282: 

     Narrated Salman Al-Farisi: 

     That he was sold (as a slave) by one master to
     another for more than ten times (i.e between 13
     and 19). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 283: 

     Narrated Salman: 

     I am from Ram-Hurmuz (i.e. a Persian town). 


Volume 5, Book 58, Number 284: 

     Narrated Salman: 

     The interval between Jesus and Muhammad was
     six hundred years. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 59: 

  Military Expeditions led by
        the Prophet (pbuh)
           (Al-Maghaazi) 



Volume 5, Book 59, Number 285: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     Once, while I was sitting beside Zaid bin
     Al-Arqam, he was asked, "How many Ghazwat
     did the Prophet undertake?" Zaid replied,
     "Nineteen." They said, "In how many Ghazwat
     did you join him?" He replied, "Seventeen." I
     asked, "Which of these was the first?" He
     replied, "Al-'Ashira or Al-'Ashiru." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 286: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud: 

     From Sad bin Mu'adh: Sad bin Mu'adh was an
     intimate friend of Umaiya bin Khalaf and
     whenever Umaiya passed through Medina, he
     used to stay with Sad, and whenever Sad went
     to Mecca, he used to stay with Umaiya. When
     Allah's Apostle arrived at Medina, Sa'd went to
     perform 'Umra and stayed at Umaiya's home in
     Mecca. He said to Umaiya, "Tell me of a time
     when (the Mosque) is empty so that I may be
     able to perform Tawaf around the Ka'ba." So
     Umaiya went with him about midday. Abu Jahl
     met them and said, "O Abu Safwan! Who is this
     man accompanying you?" He said, "He is Sad."
     Abu Jahl addressed Sad saying, "I see you
     wandering about safely in Mecca inspite of the
     fact that you have given shelter to the people
     who have changed their religion (i.e. became
     Muslims) and have claimed that you will help
     them and support them. By Allah, if you were not
     in the company of Abu Safwan, you would not
     be able to go your family safely." Sad, raising his
     voice, said to him, "By Allah, if you should stop
     me from doing this (i.e. performing Tawaf) I
     would certainly prevent you from something
     which is more valuable for you, that is, your
     passage through Medina." On this, Umaiya said
     to him, "O Sad do not raise your voice before
     Abu-l-Hakam, the chief of the people of the
     Valley (of Mecca)." Sad said, "O Umaiya, stop
     that! By Allah, I have heard Allah's Apostle
     predicting that the Muslim will kill you." Umaiya
     asked, "In Mecca?" Sad said, "I do not know."
     Umaiya was greatly scared by that news. 

     When Umaiya returned to his family, he said to
     his wife, "O Um Safwan! Don't you know what
     Sad told me? "She said, "What has he told you?"
     He replied, "He claims that Muhammad has
     informed them (i.e. companions that they will kill
     me. I asked him, 'In Mecca?' He replied, 'I do
     not know." Then Umaiya added, "By Allah, I will
     never go out of Mecca." But when the day of
     (the Ghazwa of) Badr came, Abu Jahl called the
     people to war, saying, "Go and protect your
     caravan." But Umaiya disliked to go out (of
     Mecca). Abu Jahl came to him and said, "O Abu
     Safwan! If the people see you staying behind
     though you are the chief of the people of the
     Valley, then they will remain behind with you."
     Abu Jahl kept on urging him to go until he (i.e.
     Umaiya) said, "As you have forced me to change
     my mind, by Allah, I will buy the best camel in
     Mecca. Then Umaiya said (to his wife). "O Um
     Safwan, prepare what I need (for the journey)."
     She said to him, "O Abu Safwan! Have you
     forgotten what your Yathribi brother told you?"
     He said, "No, but I do not want to go with them
     but for a short distance." So when Umaiya went
     out, he used to tie his camel wherever he
     camped. He kept on doing that till Allah caused
     him to be killed at Badr. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 287: 

     Narrated Kab bin Malik: 

     I never failed to join Allah's Apostle in any of his
     Ghazawat except in the Ghazwa of Tabuk.
     However, I did not take part in the Ghazwa of
     Badr, but none who failed to take part in it, was
     blamed, for Allah's Apostle had gone out to meet
     the caravans of (Quraish, but Allah caused them
     (i.e. Muslims) to meet their enemy unexpectedly
     (with no previous intention) . 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 288: 

     Narrated Ibn Masud: 

     I witnessed Al-Miqdad bin Al-Aswad in a scene
     which would have been dearer to me than
     anything had I been the hero of that scene. He
     (i.e. Al-Miqdad) came to the Prophet while the
     Prophet was urging the Muslims to fight with the
     pagans. Al-Miqdad said, "We will not say as the
     People of Moses said: Go you and your Lord
     and fight you two. (5.27). But we shall fight on
     your right and on your left and in front of you and
     behind you." I saw the face of the Prophet getting
     bright with happiness, for that saying delighted
     him. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 289: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     On the day of the battle of Badr, the Prophet
     said, "O Allah! I appeal to You (to fulfill) Your
     Covenant and Promise. O Allah! If Your Will is
     that none should worship You (then give victory
     to the pagans)." Then Abu Bakr took hold of him
     by the hand and said, "This is sufficient for you."
     The Prophet came out saying, "Their multitude
     will be put to flight and they will show their
     backs." (54.45) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 290: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The believers who failed to join the Ghazwa of
     Badr and those who took part in it are not equal
     (in reward). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 291: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     I and Ibn 'Umar were considered too young to
     take part in the battle of Badr. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 292: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     I and Ibn 'Umar were considered too young (to
     take part) in the battle of Badr, and the number
     of the Emigrant warriors were over sixty (men)
     and the Ansar were over 249. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 293: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The companions of (the Prophet) Muhammad
     who took part in Badr, told me that their number
     was that of Saul's (i.e. Talut's) companions who
     crossed the river (of Jordan) with him and they
     were over three-hundred-and-ten men. By Allah,
     none crossed the river with him but a believer.
     (See Qur'an 2:249) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 294: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     We, the Companions of Muhammad used to say
     that the number of the warriors of Badr was the
     same as the number of Saul's companions who
     crossed the river (of Jordan) with him, and none
     crossed the river with him but a believer, and the
     were over three-hundred-and-ten men. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 295: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     As below (Hadith 295). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 296: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     We used to say that the warriors of Badr were
     over three-hundred-and-ten, as many as the
     Companions of Saul who crossed the river with
     him; and none crossed the river with him but a
     believer. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 297: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet faced the Ka'ba and invoked evil on
     some people of Quraish, on Shaiba bin Rabi'a,
     'Utba bin Rabi'a, Al-Walid bin 'Utba and Abu
     Jahl bin Hisham. I bear witness, by Allah, that I
     saw them all dead, putrefied by the sun as that
     day was a very hot day. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 298: 

     Narrated Abdullah: That he came across Abu
     Jahl while he was on the point of death on the
     day of Badr. Abu Jahl said, "You should not be
     proud that you have killed me nor I am ashamed
     of being killed by my own folk." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 299: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     As below (Hadith 300). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 300: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Who will go and see what has
     happened to Abu Jahl?" Ibn Mas'ud went and
     found that the two sons of 'Afra had struck him
     fatally (and he was in his last breaths). 'Abdullah
     bin Mas'ud said, "Are you Abu Jahl?" And took
     him by the beard. Abu Jahl said, "Can there be a
     man superior to one you have killed or one
     whom his own folk have killed?" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 301: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     On the day of Badr, the Prophet said, "Who will
     go and see what has happened to Abu Jahl?" Ibn
     Mas'ud went and found that the two sons of
     'Afra had struck him fatally. 'Abdullah bin
     Mas'ud got hold of his beard and said, "'Are you
     Abu Jahl?" He replied, "Can there be a man
     more superior to one whom his own folk have
     killed (or you have killed)?" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 302: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     (as above Hadith 301). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 303: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf: 

     (the grandfather of Salih bin Ibrahim) the story of
     Badr, namely, the narration regarding the sons of
     'Afra'. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 304: 

     Narrated Abu Mijlaz: 

     From Qais bin Ubad: 'Ali bin Abi Talib said, "I
     shall be the first man to kneel down before
     (Allah), the Beneficent to receive His judgment
     on the day of Resurrection (in my favor)." Qais
     bin Ubad also said, "The following Verse was
     revealed in their connection:-- 

     "These two opponents believers and
     disbelievers) Dispute with each other About their
     Lord." (22.19) Qais said that they were those
     who fought on the day of Badr, namely, Hamza,
     'Ali, 'Ubaida or Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Harith,
     Shaiba bin Rabi'a, 'Utba and Al-Wahd bin Utba.


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 305: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     The following Holy Verse:-- 

     "These two opponents (believers & disbelievers)
     dispute with each other about their Lord,"
     (22.19) was revealed concerning six men from
     Quraish, namely, 'Ali, Hamza, 'Ubaida bin
     Al-Harith; Shaiba bin Rabi'a, 'Utba bin Rabi'a
     and Al-Walid bin 'Utba. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 306: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     The following Holy Verse:-- "These two
     opponents (believers and disbelievers) dispute
     with each other about their Lord." (22.19) was
     revealed concerning us. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 307: 

     Narrated Qais bin Ubad: 

     I heard Abu Dhar swearing that these Holy
     Verses were revealed in connection with those
     six persons on the day of Badr. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 308: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     I heard Abu Dhar swearing that the following
     Holy verse:-- "These two opponents (believers
     and disbelievers) disputing with each other about
     their Lord," (22.19) was revealed concerning
     those men who fought on the day of Badr,
     namely, Hamza, 'Ali, Ubaida bin Al-Harith, Utba
     and Shaiba----the two sons of Rabi'a-- and
     Al-Walid bin 'Utba. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 309: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     A man asked Al-Bara' and I was listening, "Did
     'Ali take part in (the battle of) Badr?" Al-Bara'
     said, "(Yes). he even met (his enemies) in a duel
     and was clad in two armors (one over the
     other)," 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 310: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf: 

     "I had an agreement with Umaiya bin Khalaf (that
     he would look after my relatives and property in
     Mecca, and I would look after his relatives and
     property in Medina)." 'Abdur-Rahman then
     mentioned the killing of Umaiya and his son on
     the day of Badr, and Bilal said, "Woe to me if
     Umaiya remains safe (i.e. alive) . " 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 311: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet recited Surat-an-Najm and then
     prostrated himself, and all who were with him
     prostrated too. But an old man took a handful of
     dust and touched his forehead with it saying,
     "This is sufficient for me." Later on I saw him
     killed as an infidel. 

     Narrated 'Urwa (the son of Az- Zubair):
     Az-Zubair had three scars caused by the sword,
     one of which was over his shoulder and I used to
     insert my fingers in it. He received two of those
     wounds on the day of Badr and one on the day
     of Al-Yarmuk. When 'Abdullah bin Zubair was
     killed, 'Abdul-Malik bin Marwan said to me, "O
     'Urwa, do you recognize the sword of
     Az-Zubair?" I said, "Yes." He said, "What marks
     does it have?" I replied, "It has a dent in its sharp
     edge which was caused in it on the day of Badr."
     'Abdul- Malik said, "You are right! (i.e. their
     swords) have dents because of clashing with the
     regiments of the enemies Then 'Abdul-Malik
     returned that sword to me (i.e. Urwa). (Hisham,
     'Urwa's son said, "We estimated the price of the
     sword as three-thousand (Dinars) and after that it
     was taken by one of us (i.e. the inheritors) and I
     wish I could have had it.") 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 312: 

     Narrated Hisham: 

     That his father said, "The sword of Az-Zubair
     was decorated with silver." Hisham added, "The
     sword of 'Urwa was (also) decorated with silver.
     " 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 313: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     On the day of (the battle) of Al-Yarmuk, the
     companions of Allah's Apostle said to
     Az-Zubair, "Will you attack the enemy so that
     we shall attack them with you?" Az-Zubair
     replied, "If I attack them, you people would not
     support me." They said, "No, we will support
     you." So Az-Zubair attacked them (i.e.
     Byzantine) and pierced through their lines, and
     went beyond them and none of his companions
     was with him. Then he returned and the enemy
     got hold of the bridle of his (horse) and struck
     him two blows (with the sword) on his shoulder.
     Between these two wounds there was a scar
     caused by a blow, he had received on the day of
     Badr (battle). When I was a child I used to play
     with those scars by putting my fingers in them.
     On that day (my brother) "Abdullah bin
     Az-Zubair was also with him and he was ten
     years old. Az-Zubair had carried him on a horse
     and let him to the care of some men. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 314: 

     Narrated Abu Talha: 

     On the day of Badr, the Prophet ordered that the
     corpses of twenty four leaders of Quraish should
     be thrown into one of the dirty dry wells of Badr.
     (It was a habit of the Prophet that whenever he
     conquered some people, he used to stay at the
     battle-field for three nights. So, on the third day
     of the battle of Badr, he ordered that his
     she-camel be saddled, then he set out, and his
     companions followed him saying among
     themselves." "Definitely he (i.e. the Prophet) is
     proceeding for some great purpose." When he
     halted at the edge of the well, he addressed the
     corpses of the Quraish infidels by their names
     and their fathers' names, "O so-and-so, son of
     so-and-so and O so-and-so, son of so-and-so!
     Would it have pleased you if you had obeyed
     Allah and His Apostle? We have found true what
     our Lord promised us. Have you too found true
     what your Lord promised you? "'Umar said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! You are speaking to bodies that
     have no souls!" Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in
     Whose Hand Muhammad's soul is, you do not
     hear, what I say better than they do." (Qatada
     said, "Allah brought them to life (again) to let
     them hear him, to reprimand them and slight them
     and take revenge over them and caused them to
     feel remorseful and regretful.") 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 315: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     regarding the Statement of Allah:--"Those who
     have changed Allah's Blessings for disbelief..."
     (14.28) The people meant here by Allah, are the
     infidels of Quraish. ('Amr, a sub-narrator said,
     "Those are (the infidels of) Quraish and
     Muhammad is Allah's Blessing. Regarding Allah's
     Statement:"..and have led their people Into the
     house of destruction? (14.29) Ibn 'Abbas said,
     "It means the Fire they will suffer from (after their
     death) on the day of Badr." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 316: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     It was mentioned before 'Aisha that Ibn 'Umar
     attributed the following statement to the Prophet
     "The dead person is punished in the grave
     because of the crying and lamentation Of his
     family." On that, 'Aisha said, "But Allah's Apostle
     said, 'The dead person is punished for his crimes
     and sins while his family cry over him then." She
     added, "And this is similar to the statement of
     Allah's Apostle when he stood by the (edge of
     the) well which contained the corpses of the
     pagans killed at Badr, 'They hear what I say.'
     She added, "But he said now they know very
     well what I used to tell them was the truth."
     'Aisha then recited: 'You cannot make the dead
     hear.' (30.52) and 'You cannot make those who
     are in their Graves, hear you.' (35.22) that is,
     when they had taken their places in the (Hell)
     Fire. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 317: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet stood at the well of Badr (which
     contained the corpses of the pagans) and said,
     "Have you found true what your lord promised
     you?" Then he further said, "They now hear what
     I say." This was mentioned before 'Aisha and she
     said, "But the Prophet said, 'Now they know
     very well that what I used to tell them was the
     truth.' Then she recited (the Holy Verse):-- "You
     cannot make the dead hear... ...till the end of
     Verse)." (30.52) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 318: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Haritha was martyred on the day (of the battle)
     of Badr, and he was a young boy then. His
     mother came to the Prophet and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! You know how dear Haritha is to me.
     If he is in Paradise, I shall remain patient, and
     hope for reward from Allah, but if it is not so,
     then you shall see what I do?" He said, "May
     Allah be merciful to you! Have you lost your
     senses? Do you think there is only one Paradise?
     There are many Paradises and your son is in the
     (most superior) Paradise of Al-Firdaus." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 319: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     Allah's Apostle sent me, Abu Marthad and
     Az-Zubair, and all of us were riding horses, and
     said, "Go till you reach Raudat-Khakh where
     there is a pagan woman carrying a letter from
     Hatib bin Abi Balta' a to the pagans of Mecca."
     So we found her riding her camel at the place
     which Allah's Apostle had mentioned. We said
     (to her),"(Give us) the letter." She said, "I have
     no letter." Then we made her camel kneel down
     and we searched her, but we found no letter.
     Then we said, "Allah's Apostle had not told us a
     lie, certainly. Take out the letter, otherwise we
     will strip you naked." When she saw that we
     were determined, she put her hand below her
     waist belt, for she had tied her cloak round her
     waist, and she took out the letter, and we
     brought her to Allah's Apostle Then 'Umar said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! (This Hatib) has betrayed
     Allah, His Apostle and the believers! Let me cut
     off his neck!" The Prophet asked Hatib, "What
     made you do this?" Hatib said, "By Allah, I did
     not intend to give up my belief in Allah and His
     Apostle but I wanted to have some influence
     among the (Mecca) people so that through it,
     Allah might protect my family and property.
     There is none of your companions but has some
     of his relatives there through whom Allah
     protects his family and property." The Prophet
     said, "He has spoken the truth; do no say to him
     but good." 'Umar said, "He as betrayed Allah,
     His Apostle and the faithful believers. Let me cut
     off his neck!" The Prophet said, "Is he not one of
     the Badr warriors? May be Allah looked at the
     Badr warriors and said, 'Do whatever you like,
     as I have granted Paradise to you, or said, 'I
     have forgiven you."' On this, tears came out of
     Umar's eyes, and he said, "Allah and His Apostle
     know better." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 320: 

     Narrated Usaid: 

     On the day of Badr, Allah's Apostle said to us,
     "When the enemy comes near to you, shoot at
     them but use your arrows sparingly (so that your
     arrows should not be wasted)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 321: 

     Narrated Abu Usaid: 

     On the day of (the battle of) Badr, Allah's
     Apostle said to us, "When your enemy comes
     near to you (i.e. overcome you by sheer
     number), shoot at them but use your arrows
     sparingly." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 322: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     On the day of Uhud the Prophet appointed
     'Abdullah bin Jubair as chief of the archers, and
     seventy among us were injured and martyred. On
     the day (of the battle) of Badr, the Prophet and
     his companions had inflicted 140 casualties on
     the pagans, 70 were taken prisoners, and 70
     were killed. Abu Sufyan said, "This is a day of
     (revenge) for the day of Badr and the issue of
     war is undecided ." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 323: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     That the Prophet said, "The good is what Allah
     gave us later on (after Uhud), and the reward of
     truthfulness is what Allah gave us after the day
     (of the battle) of Badr." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 324: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf: 

     While I was fighting in the front file on the day (of
     the battle) of Badr, suddenly I looked behind and
     saw on my right and left two young boys and did
     not feel safe by standing between them. Then one
     of them asked me secretly so that his companion
     may not hear, "O Uncle! Show me Abu Jahl." I
     said, "O nephew! What will you do to him?" He
     said, "I have promised Allah that if I see him (i.e.
     Abu Jahl), I will either kill him or be killed before
     I kill him." Then the other said the same to me
     secretly so that his companion should not hear. I
     would not have been pleased to be in between
     two other men instead of them. Then I pointed
     him (i.e. Abu Jahl) out to them. Both of them
     attacked him like two hawks till they knocked
     him down. Those two boys were the sons of
     'Afra' (i.e. an Ansari woman). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 325: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle sent out ten spies under the
     command of 'Asim bin Thabit Al-Ansari, the
     grand-father of 'Asim bin 'Umar Al-Khattab.
     When they reached (a place called) Al-Hadah
     between 'Usfan and Mecca, their presence was
     made known to a sub-tribe of Hudhail called
     Banu Lihyan. So they sent about one hundred
     archers after them. The archers traced the
     footsteps (of the Muslims) till they found the
     traces of dates which they had eaten at one of
     their camping places. The archers said, "These
     dates are of Yathrib (i.e. Medina)," and went on
     tracing the Muslims' footsteps. When 'Asim and
     his companions became aware of them, they
     took refuge in a (high) place. But the enemy
     encircled them and said, "Come down and
     surrender. We give you a solemn promise and
     covenant that we will not kill anyone of you."
     'Asim bin Thabit said, "O people! As for myself,
     I will never get down to be under the protection
     of an infidel. O Allah! Inform your Prophet about
     us." So the archers threw their arrows at them
     and martyred 'Asim. Three of them came down
     and surrendered to them, accepting their promise
     and covenant and they were Khubaib, Zaid bin
     Ad-Dathina and another man. When the archers
     got hold of them, they untied the strings of the
     arrow bows and tied their captives with them.
     The third man said, "This is the first proof of
     treachery! By Allah, I will not go with you for I
     follow the example of these." He meant the
     martyred companions. The archers dragged him
     and struggled with him (till they martyred him).
     Then Khubaib and Zaid bin Ad-Dathina were
     taken away by them and later on they sold them
     as slaves in Mecca after the event of the Badr
     battle. 

     The sons of Al-Harit bin 'Amr bin Naufal bought
     Khubaib for he was a person who had killed
     (their father) Al-Hari bin 'Amr on the day (of the
     battle) of Badr. Khubaib remained imprisoned by
     them till they decided unanimously to kill him.
     One day Khubaib borrowed from a daughter of
     Al-Harith, a razor for shaving his public hair, and
     she lent it to him. By chance, while she was
     inattentive, a little son of hers went to him (i.e.
     Khubaib) and she saw that Khubaib had seated
     him on his thigh while the razor was in his hand.
     She was so much terrified that Khubaib noticed
     her fear and said, "Are you afraid that I will kill
     him? Never would I do such a thing." Later on
     (while narrating the story) she said, "By Allah, I
     had never seen a better captive than Khubaib.
     By Allah, one day I saw him eating from a bunch
     of grapes in his hand while he was fettered with
     iron chains and (at that time) there was no fruit in
     Mecca." She used to say," It was food Allah had
     provided Khubaib with." 

     When they took him to Al-Hil out of Mecca
     sanctuary to martyr him, Khubaib requested
     them. "Allow me to offer a two-Rak'at prayer."
     They allowed him and he prayed two Rakat and
     then said, "By Allah! Had I not been afraid that
     you would think I was worried, I would have
     prayed more." Then he (invoked evil upon them)
     saying, "O Allah! Count them and kill them one
     by one, and do not leave anyone of them"' Then
     he recited: "As I am martyred as a Muslim, I do
     not care in what way I receive my death for
     Allah's Sake, for this is for the Cause of Allah. If
     He wishes, He will bless the cut limbs of my
     body." Then Abu Sarva, 'Ubqa bin Al-Harith
     went up to him and killed him. It was Khubaib
     who set the tradition of praying for any Muslim to
     be martyred in captivity (before he is executed).
     The Prophet told his companions of what had
     happened (to those ten spies) on the same day
     they were martyred. Some Quraish people, being
     informed of 'Asim bin Thabit's death, sent some
     messengers to bring a part of his body so that his
     death might be known for certain, for he had
     previously killed one of their leaders (in the battle
     of Badr). But Allah sent a swarm of wasps to
     protect the dead body of 'Asim, and they
     shielded him from the messengers who could not
     cut anything from his body. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 326: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar was once told that Said bin Zaid bin
     'Amr bin Nufail, one of the Badr warriors, had
     fallen ill on a Friday. Ibn 'Umar rode to him late
     in the forenoon. The time of the Friday prayer
     approached and Ibn 'Umar did not take part in
     the Friday prayer. 

     Narrated Subaia bint Al-Harith: That she was
     married to Sad bin Khaula who was from the
     tribe of Bani 'Amr bin Luai, and was one of those
     who fought the Badr battle. He died while she
     wa pregnant during Hajjat-ul-Wada.' Soon after
     his death, she gave birth to a child. When she
     completed the term of deliver (i.e. became
     clean), she prepared herself for suitors. Abu
     As-Sanabil bin Bu'kak, a man from the tribe of
     Bani Abd-ud-Dal called on her and said to her,
     "What! I see you dressed up for the people to
     ask you in marriage. Do you want to marry By
     Allah, you are not allowed to marry unless four
     months and ten days have elapsed (after your
     husband's death)." Subai'a in her narration said,
     "When he (i.e. Abu As-Sanabil) said this to me. I
     put on my dress in the evening and went to
     Allah's Apostle and asked him about this
     problem. He gave the verdict that I was free to
     marry as I had already given birth to my child
     and ordered me to marry if I wished." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 327: 

     Narrated Rifaa: 

     (who was one of the Badr warriors) Gabriel
     came to the Prophet and said, "How do you look
     upon the warriors of Badr among yourselves?"
     The Prophet said, "As the best of the Muslims."
     or said a similar statement. On that, Gabriel said,
     "And so are the Angels who participated in the
     Badr (battle)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 328: 

     Narrated Mu'adh bin Rifa'a bin Rafi: 

     Rifa'a was one of the warriors of Badr while (his
     father) Rafi' was one of the people of Al-'Aqaba
     (i.e. those who gave the pledge of allegiance at
     Al-'Aqaba). Rafi' used to say to his son, "I would
     not have been happier if I had taken part in the
     Badr battle instead of taking part in the 'Aqaba
     pledge." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 329: 

     Narrated Mu'adh: 

     The one who asked (the Prophet) was Gabriel. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 330: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said on the day (of the battle) of
     Badr, "This is Gabriel holding the head of his
     horse and equipped with arms for the battle. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 331: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Abu Zaid died and did not leave any offspring,
     and he was one of the Badr warriors. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 332: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Abu Said bin Malik Al-Khudri returned from a
     journey and his family offered him some meat of
     sacrifices offered at 'Id ul Adha. On that he said,
     "I will not eat it before asking (whether it is
     allowed)." He went to his maternal brother,
     Qatada bin N i 'man, who was one of the Badr
     warriors, and asked him about it. Qatada said,
     "After your departure, an order was issued by
     the Prophet cancelling the prohibition of eating
     sacrifices after three days." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 333: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     Az-Zubair said, "I met Ubaida bin Said bin
     Al-As on the day (of the battle) of Badr and he
     was covered with armor; so much that only his
     eyes were visible. He was surnamed Abu
     Dhat-al-Karish. He said (proudly), 'I am
     Abu-al-Karish.' I attacked him with the spear
     and pierced his eye and he died. I put my foot
     over his body to pull (that spear) out, but even
     then I had to use a great force to take it out as its
     both ends were bent." 'Urwa said, "Later on
     Allah's Apostle asked Az-Zubair for the spear
     and he gave it to him. When Allah's Apostle
     died, Az-Zubair took it back. After that Abu
     Bakr demanded it and he gave it to him, and
     when Abu Bakr died, Az-Zubair took it back.
     'Umar then demanded it from him and he gave it
     to him. When 'Umar died, Az-Zubair took it
     back, and then 'Uthman demanded it from him
     and he gave it to him. When 'Uthman was
     martyred, the spear remained with Ali's offspring.
     Then 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair demanded it back,
     and it remained with him till he was martyred. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 334: 

     Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit: 

     (who was one of the Badr warriors) Allah's
     Apostle said, "Give me the pledge of allegiance." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 335: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Abu Hudhaifa, one of
     those who fought the battle of Badr, with Allah's
     Apostle adopted Salim as his son and married his
     niece Hind bint Al-Wahd bin 'Utba to him' and
     Salim was a freed slave of an Ansari woman.
     Allah's Apostle also adopted Zaid as his son. In
     the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance the custom
     was that, if one adopted a son, the people would
     call him by the name of the adopted-father whom
     he would inherit as well, till Allah revealed: "Call
     them (adopted sons) By (the names of) their
     fathers." (33.5) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 336: 

     Narrated Ar-Rubai bint Muauwidh: 

     The Prophet came to me after consuming his
     marriage with me and sat down on my bed as
     you (the sub-narrator) are sitting now, and small
     girls were beating the tambourine and singing in
     lamentation of my father who had been killed on
     the day of the battle of Badr. Then one of the
     girls said, "There is a Prophet amongst us who
     knows what will happen tomorrow." The
     Prophet said (to her)," Do not say this, but go on
     saying what you have spoken before." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 337: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     As below (Hadith 338). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 338: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Abu Talha, a companion of Allah's Apostle and
     one of those who fought at Badr together with
     Allah's Apostle told me that Allah's Apostle said.
     "Angels do not enter a house in which there is a
     dog or a picture" He meant the images of
     creatures that have souls. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 339: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     as below (Hadith 340). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 340: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     I had a she-camel which I got in my share from
     the booty of the battle of Badr, and the Prophet
     had given me another she camel from the
     Khumus which Allah had bestowed on him that
     day. And when I intended to celebrate my
     marriage to Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet,
     I made an arrangement with a goldsmith from
     Bani Qainuqa 'that he should go with me to bring
     Idhkhir (i.e. a kind of grass used by gold-smiths)
     which I intended to sell to gold-smiths in order to
     spend its price on the marriage banquet. While I
     was collecting ropes and sacks of pack saddles
     for my two she-camels which were kneeling
     down beside an Ansari's dwelling and after
     collecting what I needed, I suddenly found that
     the humps of the two she-camels had been cut
     off and their flanks had been cut open and
     portions of their livers had been taken out. On
     seeing that, I could not help weeping. I asked,
     "Who has done that?" They (i.e. the people) said,
     "Hamza bin 'Abdul Muttalib has done it. He is
     present in this house with some Ansari drinkers,
     a girl singer, and his friends. The singer said in
     her song, "O Hamza, get at the fat she-camels!"
     On hearing this, Hamza rushed to his sword and
     cut of the camels' humps and cut their flanks
     open and took out portions from their livers."
     Then I came to the Prophet, with whom Zaid bin
     Haritha was present. The Prophet noticed my
     state and asked, "What is the matter?" I said, "O
     Allah's Apostle, I have never experienced such a
     day as today! Hamza attacked my two
     she-camels, cut off their humps and cut their
     flanks open, and he is still present in a house
     along some drinkers." The Prophet asked for his
     cloak, put it on, and proceeded, followed by
     Zaid bin Haritha and myself, till he reached the
     house where Hamza was. He asked the
     permission to enter, and he was permitted. The
     Prophet started blaming Hamza for what he had
     done. Hamza was drunk and his eyes were red.
     He looked at the Prophet then raised his eyes to
     look at his knees and raised his eves more to
     look at his face and then said, "You are not but
     my father's slaves." When the Prophet
     understood that Hamza was drunk, he retreated,
     walking backwards went out and we left with
     him. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 341: 

     Narrated Ibn Maqal: 

     'Ali led the funeral prayer of Sahl bin Hunaif and
     said, "He was one of the warriors of Badr." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 342: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Umar bin Al-Khattab said, "When (my daughter)
     Hafsa bint 'Umar lost her husband Khunais bin
     Hudhaifa As-Sahrni who was one of the
     companions of Allah's Apostle and had fought in
     the battle of Badr and had died in Medina, I met
     'Uthman bin 'Affan and suggested that he should
     marry Hafsa saying, "If you wish, I will marry
     Hafsa bint 'Umar to you,' on that, he said, 'I will
     think it over.' I waited for a few days and then he
     said to me. 'I am of the opinion that I shall not
     marry at present.' Then I met Abu Bakr and said,
     'if you wish, I will marry you, Hafsa bint 'Umar.'
     He kept quiet and did not give me any reply and
     I became more angry with him than I was with
     Uthman . Some days later, Allah's Apostle
     demanded her hand in marriage and I married
     her to him. Later on Abu Bakr met me and said,
     "Perhaps you were angry with me when you
     offered me Hafsa for marriage and I gave no
     reply to you?' I said, 'Yes.' Abu Bakr said,
     'Nothing prevented me from accepting your offer
     except that I learnt that Allah's Apostle had
     referred to the issue of Hafsa and I did not want
     to disclose the secret of Allah's Apostle , but had
     he (i.e. the Prophet) given her up I would surely
     have accepted her." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 343: 

     Narrated Abu Masud Al-Badri: 

     The Prophet said, "A man's spending on his
     family is a deed of charity." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 344: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: 

     I heard 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair talking to 'Umar bin
     'Abdul 'Aziz during the latter's Governorship (at
     Medina), he said, "Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba
     delayed the 'Asr prayer when he was the ruler of
     Al-Kufa. On that, Abu Mas'ud. 'Uqba bin 'Amr
     Al-Ansari, the grand-father of Zaid bin Hasan,
     who was one of the Badr warriors, came in and
     said, (to Al-Mughira), 'You know that Gabriel
     came down and offered the prayer and Allah's
     Apostle prayed five prescribed prayers, and
     Gabriel said (to the Prophet ), "I have been
     ordered to do so (i.e. offer these five prayers at
     these fixed stated hours of the day)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 345: 

     Narrated Abu Masud Al-Badri: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "It is sufficient for one to
     recite the last two Verses of Surat-al-Baqara at
     night." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 346: 

     Narrated Mahmud bin Ar-Rabi: 

     That 'Itban bin Malik who was one of the
     companions of the Prophet and one of the
     warriors of Badr, came to Allah's Apostle. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 347: 

     Narrated Ibn Shihab: 

     I asked Al-Husain bin Muhammad who was one
     of the sons of Salim and one of the nobles
     amongst them, about the narration of Mahmud
     bin Ar-Rabi 'from 'Itban bin Malik, and he
     confirmed it. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 348: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Rabi'a: 

     who was one of the leaders of Bani 'Adi and his
     father participated in the battle of Badr in the
     company of the Prophet. 'Umar appointed
     Qudama bin Maz'un as ruler of Bahrain, Qudama
     was one of the warriors of the battle of Badr and
     was the maternal uncle of Abdullah bin 'Umar
     and Hafsa. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 349: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: 

     Salim bin 'Abdullah told me that Rafi' bin Khadij
     told 'Abdullah bin 'Umar that his two paternal
     uncles who had fought in the battle of Badr
     informed him that Allah's Apostle forbade the
     renting of fields. I said to Salim, "Do you rent
     your land?" He said, "Yes, for Rafi' is mistaken." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 350: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Shaddad bin Al-Had
     Al-Laithi: 

     I saw Rifa'a bin Rafi Al-Ansari who was a Badr
     warrior. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 351: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama: 

     That 'Amr bin Auf, who was an ally of Bani
     'Amir bin Luai and one of those who fought at
     Badr in the company of the Prophet , said,
     "Allah's Apostle sent Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah
     to Bahrain to bring the Jizya taxation from its
     people, for Allah's Apostle had made a peace
     treaty with the people of Bahrain and appointed
     Al-'Ala' bin Al-Hadrami as their ruler. So, Abu
     'Ubaida arrived with the money from Bahrain.
     When the Ansar heard of the arrival of Abu
     'Ubaida (on the next day) they offered the
     morning prayer with the Prophet and when the
     morning prayer had finished, they presented
     themselves before him. On seeing the Ansar,
     Allah's Apostle smiled and said, "I think you have
     heard that Abu 'Ubaida has brought something?"
     They replied, "Indeed, it is so, O Allah's
     Apostle!" He said, "Be happy, and hope for what
     will please you. By Allah, I am not afraid that you
     will be poor, but I fear that worldly wealth will be
     bestowed upon you as it was bestowed upon
     those who lived before you. So you will compete
     amongst yourselves for it, as they competed for it
     and it will destroy you as it did them." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 352: 

     Narrated Nafi: Ibn 'Umar used to kill all kinds of
     snakes until Abu Lubaba Al-Badri told him that
     the Prophet had forbidden the killing of harmless
     snakes living in houses and called Jinan. So Ibn
     'Umar gave up killing them. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 353: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Some men of the Ansar requested Allah's
     Apostle to allow them to see him, they said,
     "Allow us to forgive the ransom of our sister's
     son, 'Abbas." The Prophet said, "By Allah, you
     will not leave a single Dirham of it!" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 354: 

     Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Adi bin Al-Khiyar: 

     That Al-Miqdad bin 'Amr Al-Kindi, who was an
     ally of Bani Zuhra and one of those who fought
     the battle of Badr together with Allah's Apostle
     told him that he said to Allah's Apostle,
     "Suppose I met one of the infidels and we fought,
     and he struck one of my hands with his sword
     and cut it off and then took refuge in a tree and
     said, "I surrender to Allah (i.e. I have become a
     Muslim),' could I kill him, O Allah's Apostle,
     after he had said this?" Allah's Apostle said,
     "You should not kill him." Al-Miqdad said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! But he had cut off one of my
     two hands, and then he had uttered those
     words?" Allah's Apostle replied, "You should not
     kill him, for if you kill him, he would be in your
     position where you had been before killing him,
     and you would be in his position where he had
     been before uttering those words." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 355: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle said on the day of Badr, "Who
     will go and see what has happened to Abu Jahl?"
     Ibn Mas'ud went and saw him struck by the two
     sons of 'Afra and was on the point of death . Ibn
     Mas'ud said, "Are you Abu Jahl?" Abu Jahl
     replied, "Can there be a man more superior to
     the one whom you have killed (or as Sulaiman
     said, or his own folk have killed.)?" Abu Jahl
     added, "Would that I had been killed by other
     than a mere farmer. " 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 356: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     'Umar said, "When the Prophet died I said to
     Abu Bakr, 'Let us go to our Ansari brethren.'
     We met two pious men from them, who had
     fought in the battle of Badr." When I mentioned
     this to Urwa bin Az-Zubair, he said, "Those two
     pious men were 'Uwaim bin Sa'ida and Manbin
     Adi." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 357: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     The Badr warriors were given five thousand
     (Dirhams) each, yearly. 'Umar said, "I will surely
     give them more than what I will give to others." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 358: 

     Narrated Jubair bin Mut'im: 

     I heard the Prophet reciting Surat-at-Tur in
     Maghrib prayer, and that was at a time when
     belief was first planted in my heart. The Prophet
     while speaking about the war prisoners of Badr,
     said, "Were Al-Mutim bin Adi alive and
     interceded with me for these filthy people, I
     would definitely forgive them for his sake." 

     Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab: When the first
     civil strife (in Islam) took place because of the
     murder of 'Uthman, it left none of the Badr
     warriors alive. When the second civil strife, that
     is the battle of Al-Harra, took place, it left none
     of the Hudaibiya treaty companions alive. Then
     the third civil strife took place and it did not
     subside till it had exhausted all the strength of the
     people. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 359: 

     Narrated Yunus bin Yazid: 

     I heard Az-Zuhri saying, "I heard 'Urwa bin
     Az-Zubair. Said bin Al-Musaiyab, 'Alqama bin
     Waqqas and 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah each
     narrating part of the narrative concerning 'Aisha
     the wife of the Prophet. 'Aisha said: When I and
     Um Mistah were returning, Um Mistah stumbled
     by treading on the end of her robe, and on that
     she said, 'May Mistah be ruined.' I said, 'You
     have said a bad thing, you curse a man who took
     part in the battle of Badr!." Az-Zuhri then
     narrated the narration of the Lie (forged against
     'Aisha). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 360: 

     Narrated Ibn Shihab: 

     These were the battles of Allah's Apostle (which
     he fought), and while mentioning (the Badr battle)
     he said, "While the corpses of the pagans were
     being thrown into the well, Allah's Apostle said
     (to them), 'Have you found what your Lord
     promised true?" 'Abdullah said, "Some of the
     Prophet's companions said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     You are addressing dead people.' Allah's
     Apostle replied, 'You do not hear what I am
     saying, better than they.' The total number of
     Muslim fighters from Quraish who fought in the
     battle of Badr and were given their share of the
     booty, were 81 men." Az-Zubair said, "When
     their shares were distributed, their number was
     101 men. But Allah knows it better." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 361: 

     Narrated Az-Zubair: 

     On the day of Badr, (Quraishi) Emigrants
     received 100 shares of the war booty." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 362: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Bani An-Nadir and Bani Quraiza fought (against
     the Prophet violating their peace treaty), so the
     Prophet exiled Bani An-Nadir and allowed Bani
     Quraiza to remain at their places (in Medina)
     taking nothing from them till they fought against
     the Prophet again) . He then killed their men and
     distributed their women, children and property
     among the Muslims, but some of them came to
     the Prophet and he granted them safety, and they
     embraced Islam. He exiled all the Jews from
     Medina. They were the Jews of Bani Qainuqa',
     the tribe of 'Abdullah bin Salam and the Jews of
     Bani Haritha and all the other Jews of Medina. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 363: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     I mentioned to Ibn 'Abbas Surat-Hashr. He said,
     "Call it Surat-an-Nadir." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 364: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Some people used to allot some date palm trees
     to the Prophet as gift till he conquered Banu
     Quraiza and Bani An-Nadir, where upon he
     started returning their date palms to them. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 365: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle had the date-palm trees of Bani
     Al-Nadir burnt and cut down at a place called
     Al-Buwaira. Allah then revealed: "What you cut
     down of the date-palm trees (of the enemy) Or
     you left them standing on their stems. It was by
     Allah's Permission." (59.5) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 366: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet burnt the date-palm trees of Bani
     An-Nadir. Hassan bin Thabit said the following
     poetic Verses about this event:-- "the terrible
     burning of Al-Buwaira Has been received
     indifferently By the nobles of Bani Luai (The
     masters and nobles of Quraish)." Abu Sufyan bin
     Al-Harith (i.e. the Prophet's cousin who was still
     a disbeliever then) replied to Hassan, saying in
     poetic verses:-- "May Allah bless that burning
     And set all its (i.e. Medina's) Parts on burning
     fire. You will see who is far from it (i.e.
     Al-Buwaira) And which of our lands will be
     Harmed by it (i.e. the burning of Al-Buwaira)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 367: 

     Narrated Malik bin Aus Al-Hadathan An-Nasri: 

     That once 'Umar bin Al-Khattab called him and
     while he was sitting with him, his gatekeeper,
     Yarfa came and said, "Will you admit 'Uthman,
     'Abdur-Rahman bin Auf, AzZubair and Sad (bin
     Abi Waqqas) who are waiting for your
     permission?" 'Umar said, "Yes, let them come
     in." After a while, Yarfa- came again and said,
     "Will you admit 'Ali and 'Abbas who are asking
     your permission?" 'Umar said, "Yes." So, when
     the two entered, 'Abbas said, "O chief of the
     believers! Judge between me and this (i.e. 'Ali).
     "Both of them had a dispute regarding the
     property of Bani An-Nadir which Allah had
     given to His Apostle as Fai (i.e. booty gained
     without fighting), 'Ali and 'Abbas started
     reproaching each other. The (present) people
     (i.e. 'Uthman and his companions) said, "O chief
     of the believers! Give your verdict in their case
     and relieve each from) the other." 'Umar said,
     "Wait I beseech you, by Allah, by Whose
     Permission both the heaven and the earth stand
     fast! Do you know that Allah's Apostle said, 'We
     (Prophets) our properties are not to be inherited,
     and whatever we leave, is to be spent in charity,'
     and he said it about himself?" They (i.e. 'Uthman
     and his company) said, "He did say it. "'Umar
     then turned towards 'Ali and 'Abbas and said, "I
     beseech you both, by Allah! Do you know that
     Allah's Apostle said this?" They replied in the
     affirmative. He said, "Now I am talking to you
     about this matter. Allah the Glorified favored His
     Apostle with something of this Fai (i.e. booty
     won without fighting) which He did not give to
     anybody else. Allah said:-- 

     "And what Allah gave to His Apostle ("Fai""
     Booty) from them--For which you made no
     expedition With either Calvary or camelry. But
     Allah gives power to His Apostles Over
     whomsoever He will And Allah is able to do all
     things." (59.6) 

     So this property was especially granted to Allah's
     Apostle . But by Allah, the Prophet neither took
     it all for himself only, nor deprived you of it, but
     he gave it to all of you and distributed it amongst
     you till only this remained out of it. And from this
     Allah's Apostle used to spend the yearly
     maintenance for his family, and whatever used to
     remain, he used to spend it where Allah's
     Property is spent (i.e. in charity), Allah's Apostle
     kept on acting like that during all his life, Then he
     died, and Abu Bakr said, 'I am the successor of
     Allah's Apostle.' So he (i.e. Abu Bakr) took
     charge of this property and disposed of it in the
     same manner as Allah's Apostle used to do, and
     all of you (at that time) knew all about it." Then
     'Umar turned towards 'Ali and 'Abbas and said,
     "You both remember that Abu Bakr disposed of
     it in the way you have described and Allah
     knows that, in that matter, he was sincere, pious,
     rightly guided and the follower of the right. Then
     Allah caused Abu Bakr to die and I said, 'I am
     the successor of Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr.'
     So I kept this property in my possession for the
     first two years of my rule (i.e. Caliphate and I
     used to dispose of it in the same wa as Allah's
     Apostle and Abu Bakr used to do; and Allah
     knows that I have been sincere, pious, rightly
     guided an the follower of the right (in this matte
     Later on both of you (i.e. 'Ali and Abbas) came
     to me, and the claim of you both was one and the
     same, O 'Abbas! You also came to me. So I told
     you both that Allah's Apostle said, "Our property
     is not inherited, but whatever we leave is to be
     given in charity.' Then when I thought that I
     should better hand over this property to you both
     or the condition that you will promise and pledge
     before Allah that you will dispose it off in the
     same way as Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr did
     and as I have done since the beginning of my
     caliphate or else you should not speak to me
     (about it).' So, both of you said to me, 'Hand it
     over to us on this condition.' And on this
     condition I handed it over to you. Do you want
     me now to give a decision other than that
     (decision)? By Allah, with Whose Permission
     both the sky and the earth stand fast, I will never
     give any decision other than that (decision) till the
     Last Hour is established. But if you are unable to
     manage it (i.e. that property), then return it to me,
     and I will manage on your behalf." The
     sub-narrator said, "I told 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair of
     this Hadith and he said, 'Malik bin Aus has told
     the truth" I heard 'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet
     saying, 'The wives of the Prophet sent 'Uthman
     to Abu Bakr demanding from him their 1/8 of the
     Fai which Allah had granted to his Apostle. But I
     used to oppose them and say to them: Will you
     not fear Allah? Don't you know that the Prophet
     used to say: Our property is not inherited, but
     whatever we leave is to be given in charity? The
     Prophet mentioned that regarding himself. He
     added: 'The family of Muhammad can take their
     sustenance from this property. So the wives of
     the Prophet stopped demanding it when I told
     them of that.' So, this property (of Sadaqa) was
     in the hands of Ali who withheld it from 'Abbas
     and overpowered him. Then it came in the hands
     of Hasan bin 'Ali, then in the hands of Husain bin
     'Ali, and then in the hands of Ali bin Husain and
     Hasan bin Hasan, and each of the last two used
     to manage it in turn, then it came in the hands of
     Zaid bin Hasan, and it was truly the Sadaqa of
     Allah's Apostle ." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 368: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Fatima and Al'Abbas came to Abu Bakr,
     claiming their inheritance of the Prophet's land of
     Fadak and his share from Khaibar. Abu Bakr
     said, "I heard the Prophet saying, 'Our property
     is not inherited, and whatever we leave is to be
     given in charity. But the family of Muhammad can
     take their sustenance from this property.' By
     Allah, I would love to do good to the Kith and
     kin of Allah's Apostle rather than to my own Kith
     and kin." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 369: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Who is willing to kill Ka'b
     bin Al-Ashraf who has hurt Allah and His
     Apostle?" Thereupon Muhammad bin Maslama
     got up saying, "O Allah's Apostle! Would you
     like that I kill him?" The Prophet said, "Yes,"
     Muhammad bin Maslama said, "Then allow me
     to say a (false) thing (i.e. to deceive Kab). "The
     Prophet said, "You may say it." Then
     Muhammad bin Maslama went to Kab and said,
     "That man (i.e. Muhammad demands Sadaqa
     (i.e. Zakat) from us, and he has troubled us, and
     I have come to borrow something from you." On
     that, Kab said, "By Allah, you will get tired of
     him!" Muhammad bin Maslama said, "Now as
     we have followed him, we do not want to leave
     him unless and until we see how his end is going
     to be. Now we want you to lend us a camel load
     or two of food." (Some difference between
     narrators about a camel load or two.) Kab said,
     "Yes, (I will lend you), but you should mortgage
     something to me." Muhammad bin Mas-lama and
     his companion said, "What do you want?" Ka'b
     replied, "Mortgage your women to me." They
     said, "How can we mortgage our women to you
     and you are the most handsome of the 'Arabs?"
     Ka'b said, "Then mortgage your sons to me."
     They said, "How can we mortgage our sons to
     you? Later they would be abused by the people's
     saying that so-and-so has been mortgaged for a
     camel load of food. That would cause us great
     disgrace, but we will mortgage our arms to you."
     Muhammad bin Maslama and his companion
     promised Kab that Muhammad would return to
     him. He came to Kab at night along with Kab's
     foster brother, Abu Na'ila. Kab invited them to
     come into his fort, and then he went down to
     them. His wife asked him, "Where are you going
     at this time?" Kab replied, "None but
     Muhammad bin Maslama and my (foster)
     brother Abu Na'ila have come." His wife said, "I
     hear a voice as if dropping blood is from him,
     Ka'b said. "They are none but my brother
     Muhammad bin Maslama and my foster brother
     Abu Naila. A generous man should respond to a
     call at night even if invited to be killed."
     Muhammad bin Maslama went with two men.
     (Some narrators mention the men as 'Abu bin
     Jabr. Al Harith bin Aus and Abbad bin Bishr).
     So Muhammad bin Maslama went in together
     with two men, and sail to them, "When Ka'b
     comes, I will touch his hair and smell it, and when
     you see that I have got hold of his head, strip
     him. I will let you smell his head." Kab bin
     Al-Ashraf came down to them wrapped in his
     clothes, and diffusing perfume. Muhammad bin
     Maslama said. " have never smelt a better scent
     than this. Ka'b replied. "I have got the best 'Arab
     women who know how to use the high class of
     perfume." Muhammad bin Maslama requested
     Ka'b "Will you allow me to smell your head?"
     Ka'b said, "Yes." Muhammad smelt it and made
     his companions smell it as well. Then he
     requested Ka'b again, "Will you let me (smell
     your head)?" Ka'b said, "Yes." When
     Muhammad got a strong hold of him, he said (to
     his companions), "Get at him!" So they killed him
     and went to the Prophet and informed him. (Abu
     Rafi) was killed after Ka'b bin Al-Ashraf." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 370: 

     Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib: 

     Allah's Apostle sent a group of persons to Abu
     Rafi. Abdullah bin Atik entered his house at
     night, while he was sleeping, and killed him. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 371: 

     Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib: 

     Allah's Apostle sent some men from the Ansar to
     ((kill) Abu Rafi, the Jew, and appointed
     'Abdullah bin Atik as their leader. Abu Rafi used
     to hurt Allah's Apostle and help his enemies
     against him. He lived in his castle in the land of
     Hijaz. When those men approached (the castle)
     after the sun had set and the people had brought
     back their livestock to their homes. Abdullah (bin
     Atik) said to his companions, "Sit down at your
     places. I am going, and I will try to play a trick
     on the gate-keeper so that I may enter (the
     castle)." So 'Abdullah proceeded towards the
     castle, and when he approached the gate, he
     covered himself with his clothes, pretending to
     answer the call of nature. The people had gone
     in, and the gate-keeper (considered 'Abdullah as
     one of the castle's servants) addressing him
     saying, "O Allah's Servant! Enter if you wish, for
     I want to close the gate." 'Abdullah added in his
     story, "So I went in (the castle) and hid myself.
     When the people got inside, the gate-keeper
     closed the gate and hung the keys on a fixed
     wooden peg. I got up and took the keys and
     opened the gate. Some people were staying late
     at night with Abu Rafi for a pleasant night chat in
     a room of his. When his companions of nightly
     entertainment went away, I ascended to him, and
     whenever I opened a door, I closed it from
     inside. I said to myself, 'Should these people
     discover my presence, they will not be able to
     catch me till I have killed him.' So I reached him
     and found him sleeping in a dark house amidst his
     family, I could not recognize his location in the
     house. So I shouted, 'O Abu Rafi!' Abu Rafi
     said, 'Who is it?' I proceeded towards the source
     of the voice and hit him with the sword, and
     because of my perplexity, I could not kill him. He
     cried loudly, and I came out of the house and
     waited for a while, and then went to him again
     and said, 'What is this voice, O Abu Rafi?' He
     said, 'Woe to your mother! A man in my house
     has hit me with a sword! I again hit him severely
     but I did not kill him. Then I drove the point of
     the sword into his belly (and pressed it through)
     till it touched his back, and I realized that I have
     killed him. I then opened the doors one by one
     till I reached the staircase, and thinking that I had
     reached the ground, I stepped out and fell down
     and got my leg broken in a moonlit night. I tied
     my leg with a turban and proceeded on till I sat
     at the gate, and said, 'I will not go out tonight till I
     know that I have killed him.' So, when (early in
     the morning) the cock crowed, the announcer of
     the casualty stood on the wall saying, 'I announce
     the death of Abu Rafi, the merchant of Hijaz.
     Thereupon I went to my companions and said,
     'Let us save ourselves, for Allah has killed Abu
     Rafi,' So I (along with my companions
     proceeded and) went to the Prophet and
     described the whole story to him. "He said,
     'Stretch out your (broken) leg. I stretched it out
     and he rubbed it and it became All right as if I
     had never had any ailment whatsoever." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 372: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     Allah's Apostle sent 'Abdullah bin 'Atik and
     'Abdullah bin 'Utba with a group of men to Abu
     Rafi (to kill him). They proceeded till they
     approached his castle, whereupon 'Abdullah bin
     Atik said to them, "Wait (here), and in the
     meantime I will go and see." 'Abdullah said later
     on, "I played a trick in order to enter the castle.
     By chance, they lost a donkey of theirs and came
     out carrying a flaming light to search for it. I was
     afraid that they would recognize me, so I
     covered my head and legs and pretended to
     answer the call to nature. The gatekeeper called,
     'Whoever wants to come in, should come in
     before I close the gate.' So I went in and hid
     myself in a stall of a donkey near the gate of the
     castle. They took their supper with Abu Rafi and
     had a chat till late at night. Then they went back
     to their homes. When the voices vanished and I
     no longer detected any movement, I came out. I
     had seen where the gate-keeper had kept the
     key of the castle in a hole in the wall. I took it
     and unlocked the gate of the castle, saying to
     myself, 'If these people should notice me, I will
     run away easily.' Then I locked all the doors of
     their houses from outside while they were inside,
     and ascended to Abu Rafi by a staircase. I saw
     the house in complete darkness with its light off,
     and I could not know where the man was. So I
     called, 'O Abu Rafi!' He replied, 'Who is it?' I
     proceeded towards the voice and hit him. He
     cried loudly but my blow was futile. Then I came
     to him, pretending to help him, saying with a
     different tone of my voice, ' What is wrong with
     you, O Abu Rafi?' He said, 'Are you not
     surprised? Woe on your mother! A man has
     come to me and hit me with a sword!' So again I
     aimed at him and hit him, but the blow proved
     futile again, and on that Abu Rafi cried loudly and
     his wife got up. I came again and changed my
     voice as if I were a helper, and found Abu Rafi
     lying straight on his back, so I drove the sword
     into his belly and bent on it till I heard the sound
     of a bone break. Then I came out, filled with
     astonishment and went to the staircase to
     descend, but I fell down from it and got my leg
     dislocated. I bandaged it and went to my
     companions limping. I said (to them), 'Go and tell
     Allah's Apostle of this good news, but I will not
     leave (this place) till I hear the news of his (i.e.
     Abu Rafi's) death.' When dawn broke, an
     announcer of death got over the wall and
     announced, 'I convey to you the news of Abu
     Rafi's death.' I got up and proceeded without
     feeling any pain till I caught up with my
     companions before they reached the Prophet to
     whom I conveyed the good news." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 373: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     On the day of Uhud. the Prophet said, "This is
     Gabriel holding the head of his horse and
     equipped with war material.' 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 374: 

     Narrated Uqba bin Amir: 

     Allah's Apostle offered the funeral prayers of the
     martyrs of Uhud eight years after (their death), as
     if bidding farewell to the living and the dead, then
     he ascended the pulpit and said, "I am your
     predecessor before you, and I am a witness on
     you, and your promised place to meet me will be
     Al-Haud (i.e. the Tank) (on the Day of
     Resurrection), and I am (now) looking at it from
     this place of mine. I am not afraid that you will
     worship others besides Allah, but I am afraid that
     worldly life will tempt you and cause you to
     compete with each other for it." That was the last
     look which I cast on Allah's Apostle. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 375: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     We faced the pagans on that day (of the battle of
     Uhud) and the Prophet placed a batch of archers
     (at a special place) and appointed 'Abdullah (bin
     Jubair) as their commander and said, "Do not
     leave this place; and if you should see us
     conquering the enemy, do not leave this place,
     and if you should see them conquering us, do not
     (come to) help us," So, when we faced the
     enemy, they took to their heel till I saw their
     women running towards the mountain, lifting up
     their clothes from their legs, revealing their
     leg-bangles. The Muslims started saying, "The
     booty, the booty!" 'Abdullah bin Jubair said,
     "The Prophet had taken a firm promise from me
     not to leave this place." But his companions
     refused (to stay). So when they refused (to stay
     there), (Allah) confused them so that they could
     not know where to go, and they suffered seventy
     casualties. Abu Sufyan ascended a high place
     and said, "Is Muhammad present amongst the
     people?" The Prophet said, "Do not answer him."
     Abu Sufyan said, "Is the son of Abu Quhafa
     present among the people?" The Prophet said,
     "Do not answer him." Abd Sufyan said, "Is the
     son of Al-Khattab amongst the people?" He then
     added, "All these people have been killed, for,
     were they alive, they would have replied." On
     that, 'Umar could not help saying, "You are a liar,
     O enemy of Allah! Allah has kept what will make
     you unhappy." Abu Safyan said, "Superior may
     be Hubal!" On that the Prophet said (to his
     companions), "Reply to him." They asked, "What
     may we say?" He said, "Say: Allah is More
     Elevated and More Majestic!" Abu Sufyan said,
     "We have (the idol) Al-'Uzza, whereas you have
     no 'Uzza!" The Prophet said (to his companions),
     "Reply to him." They said, "What may we say?"
     The Prophet said, "Say: Allah is our Helper and
     you have no helper." Abu Sufyan said, "(This)
     day compensates for our loss at Badr and (in)
     the battle (the victory) is always undecided and
     shared in turns by the belligerents. You will see
     some of your dead men mutilated, but neither did
     I urge this action, nor am I sorry for it." Narrated
     Jabir: Some people took wine in the morning of
     the day of Uhud and were then killed as martyrs. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 376: 

     Narrated Sad bin Ibrahim: 

     A meal was brought to 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf
     while he was fasting. He said, "Musab bin 'Umar
     was martyred, and he was better than I, yet he
     was shrouded in a Burda (i.e. a sheet) so that, if
     his head was covered, his feet became naked,
     and if his feet were covered, his head became
     naked." 'Abdur-Rahman added, "Hamza was
     martyred and he was better than 1. Then worldly
     wealth was bestowed upon us and we were
     given thereof too much. We are afraid that the
     reward of our deeds have been given to us in this
     life." 'Abdur-Rahman then started weeping so
     much that he left the food. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 377: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     On the day of the battle of Uhud, a man came to
     the Prophet and said, "Can you tell me where I
     will be if I should get martyred?" The Prophet
     replied, "In Paradise." The man threw away
     some dates he was carrying in his hand, and
     fought till he was martyred . 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 378: 

     Narrated Khabbab bin Al-Art: 

     We migrated in the company of Allah's Apostle,
     seeking Allah's Pleasure. So our reward became
     due and sure with Allah. Some of us have been
     dead without enjoying anything of their rewards
     (here), and one of them was Mus'ab bin 'Umar
     who was martyred on the day of the battle of
     Uhud, and did not leave anything except a
     Namira (i.e. a sheet in which he was shrouded).
     If we covered his head with it, his feet became
     naked, and if we covered his feet with it, his head
     became naked. So the Prophet said to us,
     "Cover his head with it and put some Idhkhir (i.e.
     a kind of grass) over his feet or throw Idhkhir
     over his feet." But some amongst us have got the
     fruits of their labor ripened, and they are
     collecting them. 

     Narrated Anas: His uncle (Anas bin An-Nadr)
     was absent from the battle of Badr and he said,
     "I was absent from the first battle of the Prophet
     (i.e. Badr battle), and if Allah should let me
     participate in (a battle) with the Prophet, Allah
     will see how strongly I will fight." So he
     encountered the day of Uhud battle. The
     Muslims fled and he said, "O Allah ! I appeal to
     You to excuse me for what these people (i.e. the
     Muslims) have done, and I am clear from what
     the pagans have done." Then he went forward
     with his sword and met Sad bin Mu'adh (fleeing),
     and asked him, "Where are you going, O Sad? I
     detect a smell of Paradise before Uhud." Then he
     proceeded on and was martyred. No-body was
     able to recognize him till his sister recognized him
     by a mole on his body or by the tips of his
     fingers. He had over 80 wounds caused by
     stabbing, striking or shooting with arrows. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 379: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Thabit: 

     When we wrote the Holy Quran, I missed one of
     the Verses of Surat-al-Ahzab which I used to
     hear Allah's Apostle reciting. Then we searched
     for it and found it with Khuzaima bin Thabit
     Al-Ansari. The Verse was:-- 

     'Among the Believers are men Who have been
     true to Their Covenant with Allah, Of them,
     some have fulfilled Their obligations to Allah (i.e.
     they have been Killed in Allah's Cause), And
     some of them are (still) waiting" (33.23) So we
     wrote this in its place in the Quran. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 380: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Thabit: 

     When the Prophet set out for (the battle of)
     Uhud, some of those who had gone out with him,
     returned. The companions of the Prophet were
     divided into two groups. One group said, "We
     will fight them (i.e. the enemy)," and the other
     group said, "We will not fight them." So there
     came the Divine Revelation:-- '(O Muslims!)
     Then what is the matter within you that you are
     divided. Into two parties about the hypocrites?
     Allah has cast them back (to disbelief) Because
     of what they have earned.' (4.88) On that, the
     Prophet said, "That is Taiba (i.e. the city of
     Medina) which clears one from one's sins as the
     fire expels the impurities of silver." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 381: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     This Verse: "When two of your parties almost
     Decided to fall away..." was revealed in our
     connection, i.e. Bani Salama and Bani Haritha
     and I would not have liked that, if it was not
     revealed, for Allah said:-- But Allah was their
     Protector.....(3.122) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 382: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     "Allah's Apostle said to me, "Have you got
     married O Jabir?" I replied, "Yes." He asked
     "What, a virgin or a matron?" I replied, "Not a
     virgin but a matron." He said, "Why did you not
     marry a young girl who would have fondled with
     you?" I replied, "O Allah's Apostle! My father
     was martyred on the day of Uhud and left nine
     (orphan) daughters who are my nine sisters; so I
     disliked to have another young girl of their age,
     but (I sought) an (elderly) woman who could
     comb their hair and look after them." The
     Prophet said, "You have done the right thing." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 383: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     That his father was martyred on the day of the
     battle of Uhud and was in debt and left six
     (orphan) daughters. Jabir, added, "When the
     season of plucking the dates came, I went to
     Allah's Apostle and said, "You know that my
     father was martyred on the day of Uhud, and he
     was heavily in debt, and I would like that the
     creditors should see you." The Prophet said, "Go
     and pile every kind of dates apart." I did so and
     called him (i.e. the Prophet ). When the creditors
     saw him, they started claiming their debts from
     me then in such a harsh manner (as they had
     never done before). So when he saw their
     attitude, he went round the biggest heap of dates
     thrice, and then sat over it and said, 'O Jabir),
     call your companions (i.e. the creditors).' Then
     he kept on measuring (and giving) to the
     creditors (their due) till Allah paid all the debt of
     my father. I would have been satisfied to retain
     nothing of those dates for my sisters after Allah
     had paid the debts of my father. But Allah saved
     all the heaps (of dates), so that when I looked at
     the heap where the Prophet had been sitting, it
     seemed as if a single date had not been taken
     away thereof." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 384: 

     Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle on the day of the battle of
     Uhud accompanied by two men fighting on his
     behalf. They were dressed in white and were
     fighting as bravely as possible. I had never seen
     them before, nor did I see them later on. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 385: 

     Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas: 

     The Prophet took out a quiver (of arrows) for
     me on the day of Uhud and said, "Throw
     (arrows); let my father and mother be sacrificed
     for you." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 386: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     Allah's Apostle mentioned both his father and
     mother for me on the day of the battle of Uhud. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 387: 

     Narrated Ibn Al Musaiyab: 

     Sad bin Abi Waqqas said, "Allah's Apostle
     mentioned both his father and mother for me on
     the day of the battle of Uhud." He meant when
     the Prophet said (to Sad) while the latter was
     fighting. "Let my father and mother be sacrificed
     for you!" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 388: 

     Narrated 'Ali: I have never heard the Prophet
     mentioning both his father and mother for
     anybody other than Sad. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 389: 

     Narrated 'Ali: I have never heard the Prophet
     mentioning his father and mother for anybody
     other than Sad bin Malik. I heard him saying on
     the day of Uhud, "O Sad throw (arrows)! Let my
     father and mother be sacrificed for you !" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 390: 

     Narrated Mu'tamir's father: 

     'Uthman said that on the day of the battle of
     Uhud, none remained with the Prophet but Talha
     and Sad. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 391: 

     Narrated As-Saib bin Yazid: 

     I have been in the company of 'AbdurRahman
     bin 'Auf, Talha bin 'Ubaidullah, Al-Miqdad and
     Sad, and I heard none of them narrating anything
     from the Prophet excepting the fact that I heard
     Talha narrating about the day of Uhud (battle) . 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 392: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     I saw Talha's paralyzed hand with which he had
     protected the Prophet on the day of Uhud. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 393: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When it was the day of Uhud, the people left the
     Prophet while Abu Talha was in front of the
     Prophet shielding him with his leather shield. Abu
     Talha was a skillful archer who used to shoot
     violently. He broke two or three arrow bows on
     that day. If a man carrying a quiver full of arrows
     passed by, the Prophet would say (to him), put
     (scatter) its contents for Abu Talha." The
     Prophet would raise his head to look at the
     enemy, whereupon Abu Talha would say, "Let
     my father and mother be sacrificed for you ! Do
     not raise your head, lest an arrow of the enemy
     should hit you. (Let) my neck (be struck) rather
     than your neck." I saw 'Aisha, the daughter of
     Abu Bakr, and Um Sulaim rolling up their
     dresses so that I saw their leg-bangles while they
     were carrying water skins on their backs and
     emptying them in the mouths of the (wounded)
     people. They would return to refill them and
     again empty them in the mouths of the (wounded)
     people. The sword fell from Abu Talha's hand
     twice or thrice (on that day). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 394: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When it was the day of Uhud, the pagans were
     defeated. Then Satan, Allah's Curse be upon
     him, cried loudly, "O Allah's Worshippers,
     beware of what is behind!" On that, the front files
     of the (Muslim) forces turned their backs and
     started fighting with the back files. Hudhaifa
     looked, and on seeing his father Al-Yaman, he
     shouted, "O Allah's Worshippers, my father, my
     father!" But by Allah, they did not stop till they
     killed him. Hudhaifa said, "May Allah forgive
     you." (The sub-narrator, 'Urwa, said, "By Allah,
     Hudhaifa continued asking Allah's Forgiveness
     for the killers of his father till he departed to Allah
     (i.e. died).") 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 395: 

     Narrated 'Uthman bin Mauhab: 

     A man came to perform the Hajj to (Allah's)
     House. Seeing some people sitting, he said,
     "Who are these sitting people?" Somebody said,
     "They are the people of Quraish." He said, "Who
     is the old man?" They said, "Ibn 'Umar." He went
     to him and said, "I want to ask you about
     something; will you tell me about it? I ask you
     with the respect due to the sanctity of this
     (Sacred) House, do you know that 'Uthman bin
     'Affan fled on the day of Uhud?" Ibn 'Umar said,
     "Yes." He said, "Do you know that he (i.e.
     'Uthman) was absent from the Badr (battle) and
     did not join it?" Ibn 'Umar said, "Yes." He said,
     "Do you know that he failed to be present at the
     Ridwan Pledge of allegiance (i.e. Pledge of
     allegiance at Hudaibiya) and did not witness it?"
     Ibn 'Umar replied, "Yes," He then said,
     "Allahu-Akbar!" Ibn 'Umar said, "Come along; I
     will inform you and explain to you what you have
     asked. As for the flight (of 'Uthman) on the day
     of Uhud, I testify that Allah forgave him. As
     regards his absence from the Badr (battle), he
     was married to the daughter of Allah's Apostle
     and she was ill, so the Prophet said to him, 'You
     will have such reward as a man who has fought
     the Badr battle will get, and will also have the
     same share of the booty.' As for his absence
     from the Ridwan Pledge of allegiance if there had
     been anybody more respected by the Meccans
     than 'Uthman bin 'Affan, the Prophet would
     surely have sent that man instead of 'Uthman. So
     the Prophet sent him (i.e. 'Uthman to Mecca)
     and the Ridwan Pledge of allegiance took place
     after 'Uthman had gone to Mecca. The Prophet
     raised his right hand saying. 'This is the hand of
     'Uthman,' and clapped it over his other hand and
     said, "This is for 'Uthman.'" Ibn 'Umar then said
     (to the man), "Go now, after taking this
     information." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 396: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     The Prophet appointed Abdullah bin Jubair as
     the commander of the cavalry archers on the day
     of the battle of Uhud. Then they returned
     defeated, and that what is referred to by Allah's
     Statement:-- "And the Apostle (Muhammad) in
     your rear was calling you." (3.153) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 397: 

     Narrated Salim's father: 

     That he heard Allah's Apostle, when raising his
     head from bowing of the first Rak'a of the
     morning prayer, saying, "O Allah! Curse
     so-and-so and so-and-so" after he had said,
     "Allah hears him who sends his praises to Him.
     Our Lord, all the Praises are for you!" So Allah
     revealed:-- "Not for you (O Muhammad!
     )......(till the end of Verse) they are indeed
     wrong-doers." (3.128) Salim bin 'Abdullah said'
     "Allah's Apostle used to invoke evil upon Safwan
     bin Umaiya, Suhail bin 'Amr and Al-Harith bin
     Hisham. So the Verse was revealed:-- "Not for
     you (O Muhammad!)......(till the end of Verse)
     For they are indeed wrong-doers." (3.128) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 398: 

     Narrated Tha'laba bin Abi Malik: 

     'Umar bin Al-Khattab distributed woolen clothes
     amongst some women of Medina, and a nice
     woolen garment remained. Some of those who
     were sitting with him, said, "O chief of the
     believers! Give it to the daughter of Allah's
     Apostle who is with you," and by that, they
     meant Um Kulthum, the daughter of 'Ali. Umar
     said, "Um Salit has got more right than she." Um
     Saht was amongst those Ansari women who had
     given the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle .
     'Umar added, "She (i.e. Um Salit) used to carry
     the filled water skins for us on the day of the
     battle of Uhud." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 399: 

     Narrated Jafar bin 'Amr bin Umaiya: 

     I went out with 'Ubaidullah bin 'Adi Al-Khaiyar.
     When we reached Hims (i.e. a town in Syria),
     'Ubaidullah bin 'Adi said (to me), "Would you
     like to see Wahshi so that we may ask him about
     the killing of Hamza?" I replied, "Yes." Wahshi
     used to live in Hims. We enquired about him and
     somebody said to us, "He is that in the shade of
     his palace, as if he were a full water skin." So we
     went up to him, and when we were at a short
     distance from him, we greeted him and he
     greeted us in return. 'Ubaidullah was wearing his
     turban and Wahshi could not see except his eyes
     and feet. 'Ubaidullah said, "O Wahshi! Do you
     know me?" Wahshi looked at him and then said,
     "No, by Allah! But I know that 'Adi bin
     Al-Khiyar married a woman called Um Qital, the
     daughter of Abu Al-Is, and she delivered a boy
     for him at Mecca, and I looked for a wet nurse
     for that child. (Once) I carried that child along
     with his mother and then I handed him over to
     her, and your feet resemble that child's feet."
     Then 'Ubaidullah uncovered his face and said (to
     Wahshi), "Will you tell us (the story of) the killing
     of Hamza?" Wahshi replied "Yes, Hamza killed
     Tuaima bin 'Adi bin Al-Khaiyar at Badr (battle)
     so my master, Jubair bin Mut'im said to me, 'If
     you kill Hamza in revenge for my uncle, then you
     will be set free." When the people set out (for the
     battle of Uhud) in the year of 'Ainain ..'Ainain is a
     mountain near the mountain of Uhud, and
     between it and Uhud there is a valley.. I went out
     with the people for the battle. When the army
     aligned for the fight, Siba' came out and said, 'Is
     there any (Muslim) to accept my challenge to a
     duel?' Hamza bin 'Abdul Muttalib came out and
     said, 'O Siba'. O Ibn Um Anmar, the one who
     circumcises other ladies! Do you challenge Allah
     and His Apostle?' Then Hamza attacked and
     killed him, causing him to be non-extant like the
     bygone yesterday. I hid myself under a rock, and
     when he (i.e. Hamza) came near me, I threw my
     spear at him, driving it into his umbilicus so that it
     came out through his buttocks, causing him to
     die. When all the people returned to Mecca, I
     too returned with them. I stayed in (Mecca) till
     Islam spread in it (i.e. Mecca). Then I left for
     Taif, and when the people (of Taif) sent their
     messengers to Allah's Apostle, I was told that the
     Prophet did not harm the messengers; So I too
     went out with them till I reached Allah's Apostle.
     When he saw me, he said, 'Are you Wahshi?' I
     said, 'Yes.' He said, 'Was it you who killed
     Hamza?' I replied, 'What happened is what you
     have been told of.' He said, 'Can you hide your
     face from me?' So I went out when Allah's
     Apostle died, and Musailamah Al-Kadhdhab
     appeared (claiming to be a prophet). I said, 'I
     will go out to Musailamah so that I may kill him,
     and make amends for killing Hamza. So I went
     out with the people (to fight Musailamah and his
     followers) and then famous events took place
     concerning that battle. Suddenly I saw a man (i.e.
     Musailamah) standing near a gap in a wall. He
     looked like an ash-colored camel and his hair
     was dishevelled. So I threw my spear at him,
     driving it into his chest in between his breasts till it
     passed out through his shoulders, and then an
     Ansari man attacked him and struck him on the
     head with a sword. 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, 'A
     slave girl on the roof of a house said: Alas! The
     chief of the believers (i.e. Musailamah) has been
     killed by a black slave." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 400: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle (pointing to his broken canine
     tooth) said, "Allah's Wrath has become severe
     on the people who harmed His Prophet. Allah's
     Wrath has become severe on the man who is
     killed by the Apostle of Allah in Allah's Cause." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 401: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas 

     Allah's Wrath became severe on him whom the
     Prophet had killed in Allah's Cause. Allah's
     Wrath became severe on the people who caused
     the face of Allah's Prophet to bleed. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 402: 

     Narrated Abu Hazim: 

     That he heard Sahl bin Sad being asked about
     the wounds of Allah's Apostle saying, "By Allah,
     I know who washed the wounds of Allah's
     Apostle and who poured water (for washing
     them), and with what he was treated." Sahl
     added, "Fatima, the daughter of Allah's Apostle
     used to wash the wounds, and 'Ali bin Abi Talib
     used to pour water from a shield. When Fatima
     saw that the water aggravated the bleeding, she
     took a piece of a mat, burnt it, and inserted its
     ashes into the wound so that the blood was
     congealed (and bleeding stopped). His canine
     tooth got broken on that day, and face was
     wounded, and his helmet was broken on his
     head." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 403: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Wrath gets severe on a person killed by a
     prophet, and Allah's Wrath became severe on
     him who had caused the face of Allah's Apostle
     to bleed 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 404: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Regarding the Holy Verse: "Those who
     responded (To the call) of Allah And the Apostle
     (Muhammad), After being wounded, For those
     of them Who did good deeds And refrained from
     wrong, there is a great reward." (3.172) 

     She said to 'Urwa, "O my nephew! Your father,
     Az-Zubair and Abu Bakr were amongst them
     (i.e. those who responded to the call of Allah and
     the Apostle on the day (of the battle of Uhud).
     When Allah's Apostle, suffered what he suffered
     on the day of Uhud and the pagans left, the
     Prophet was afraid that they might return. So he
     said, 'Who will go on their (i.e. pagans') track?'
     He then selected seventy men from amongst
     them (for this purpose)." (The sub-narrator
     added, "Abu Bakr and Az-Zubair were amongst
     them.") 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 405: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     We do not know of any tribe amongst the 'Arab
     tribes who lost more martyrs than Al-Ansar, and
     they will have superiority on the Day of
     Resurrection. Anas bin Malik told us that seventy
     from the Ansar were martyred on the day of
     Uhud, and seventy on the day (of the battle of)
     Bir Ma'una, and seventy on the day of
     Al-Yamama. Anas added, "The battle of Bir
     Ma'una took place during the lifetime of Allah's
     Apostle and the battle of Al-Yamama, during the
     caliphate of Abu Bakr, and it was the day when
     Musailamah Al-Kadhdhab was killed." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 406: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah 

     Allah's Apostle used to shroud two martyrs of
     Uhud in one sheet and then say, "Which of them
     knew Quran more?" When one of the two was
     pointed out, he would put him first in the grave.
     Then he said, "I will be a witness for them on the
     Day of Resurrection." He ordered them to be
     buried with their blood (on their bodies). Neither
     was the funeral prayer offered for them, nor were
     they washed. Jabir added, "When my father was
     martyred, I started weeping and uncovering his
     face. The companions of the Prophet stopped
     me from doing so but the Prophet did not stop
     me. Then the Prophet said, '(O Jabir.) don't
     weep over him, for the angels kept on covering
     him with their wings till his body was carried
     away (for burial)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 407: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "I saw in a dream that I moved
     a sword and its blade got broken, and that
     symbolized the casualties which the believers
     suffered on the day of Uhud. Then I moved it
     again, and it became as perfect as it had been,
     and that symbolized the Conquest (of Mecca)
     which Allah helped us to achieve, and the union
     of all the believers. I (also) saw cows in the
     dream, and what Allah does is always beneficial.
     Those cows appeared to symbolize the faithful
     believers (who were martyred) on the day of
     Uhud." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 408: 

     Narrated Khabbab: 

     We migrated with the Prophet for Allah's Cause,
     so our reward became due with Allah. Some of
     us passed away (i.e. died) without enjoying
     anything from their reward, and one of them was
     Mus'ab bin 'Umar who was killed (i.e. martyred)
     on the day of Uhud. He did not leave behind
     except a sheet of striped woolen cloth. If we
     covered his head with it, his feet became naked,
     and if we covered his feet with it, his head
     became naked. The Prophet said to us, "Cover
     his head with it and put Idhkhir (i.e. a kind of
     grass) over his feet," or said, "Put some Idhkhir
     over his feet." But some of us have got their fruits
     ripened, and they are collecting them. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 409: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "This is a mountain that loves
     us and is loved by us." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 410: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     When the mountain of Uhud appeared before
     Allah's Apostle he said, "This IS a mountain that
     loves us and is loved by us. O, Allah! Abraham
     made Mecca a Sanctuary, and I have made
     Medina (i.e. the area between its two mountains)
     a Sanctuary as well." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 411: 

     Narrated Uqba: 

     One day the Prophet went out and offered the
     (funeral) prayer for the people (i.e. martyrs) of
     Uhud as he used to offer a funeral prayer for any
     dead person, and then (after returning) he
     ascended the pulpit and said, "I am your
     predecessor before you, and I am a witness
     upon you, and I am looking at my Tank just now,
     and I have been given the keys of the treasures
     of the world (or the keys of the world). By Allah,
     I am not afraid that you will worship others
     besides Allah after me, but I am afraid that you
     will compete with each other for (the pleasures
     of) this world." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 412: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet sent a Sariya of spies and appointed
     'Asim bin Thabit, the grandfather of 'Asim bin
     'Umar bin Al-Khattab, as their leader. So they
     set out, and when they reached (a place)
     between 'Usfan and Mecca, they were
     mentioned to one of the branch tribes of Bani
     Hudhail called Lihyan. So, about one-hundred
     archers followed their traces till they (i.e. the
     archers) came to a journey station where they
     (i.e. 'Asim and his companions) had encamped
     and found stones of dates they had brought as
     journey food from Medina. 

     The archers said, "These are the dates of
     Medina," and followed their traces till they took
     them over. When 'Asim and his companions
     were not able to go ahead, they went up a high
     place, and their pursuers encircled them and said,
     "You have a covenant and a promise that if you
     come down to us, we will not kill anyone of you."
     'Asim said, "As for me, I will never come down
     on the security of an infidel. O Allah! Inform
     Your Prophet about us." So they fought with
     them till they killed 'Asim along with seven of his
     companions with arrows, and there remained
     Khubaib, Zaid and another man to whom they
     gave a promise and a covenant. So when the
     infidels gave them the covenant and promise,
     they came down. When they captured them, they
     opened the strings of their arrow bows and tied
     them with it. The third man who was with them
     said, "This is the first breach in the covenant,"
     and refused to accompany them. They dragged
     him and tried to make him accompany them, but
     he refused, and they killed him. Then they
     proceeded on taking Khubaib and Zaid till they
     sold them in Mecca. The sons of Al-Harith bin
     'Amr bin Naufal bought Khubaib. It was
     Khubaib who had killed Al-Harith bin 'Amr on
     the day of Badr. Khubaib stayed with them for a
     while as a captive till they decided unanimously
     to kill him. (At that time) Khubaib borrowed a
     razor from one of the daughters of Al-Harith to
     shave his pubic hair. She gave it to him. She said
     later on, "I was heedless of a little baby of mine,
     who moved towards Khubaib, and when it
     reached him, he put it on his thigh. 

     When I saw it, I got scared so much that
     Khubaib noticed my distress while he was
     carrying the razor in his hand. He said 'Are you
     afraid that I will kill it? Allah willing, I will never
     do that,' " Later on she used to say, "I have never
     seen a captive better than Khubaib Once I saw
     him eating from a bunch of grapes although at
     that time no fruits were available at Mecca, and
     he was fettered with iron chains, and in fact, it
     was nothing but food bestowed upon him by
     Allah." So they took him out of the Sanctuary (of
     Mecca) to kill him. He said, "Allow me to offer a
     two-Rak'at prayer." Then he went to them and
     said, "Had I not been afraid that you would think
     I was afraid of death, I would have prayed for a
     longer time." So it was Khubaib who first set the
     tradition of praying two Rakat before being
     executed. He then said, "O Allah! Count them
     one by one," and added, 'When I am being
     martyred as a Muslim, I do not care in what way
     I receive my death for Allah's Sake, because this
     death is in Allah's Cause. If He wishes, He will
     bless the cut limbs." Then 'Uqba bin Al-Harith
     got up and martyred him. The narrator added:
     The Quraish (infidels) sent some people to 'Asim
     in order to bring a part of his body so that his
     death might be known for certain, for 'Asim had
     killed one of their chiefs on the day of Badr. But
     Allah sent a cloud of wasps which protected his
     body from their messengers who could not harm
     his body consequently. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 413: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The person who killed Khubaib was Abu Sarua
     (i.e. 'Uqba bin Al-Harith). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 414: 

     Narrated 'Abdul Aziz: 

     Anas said, "The Prophet sent seventy men, called
     Al-Qurra 'for some purpose. The two groups of
     Bani Sulaim called Ri'l and Dhakwan, appeared
     to them near a well called Bir Ma'una. The
     people (i.e. Al-Qurra) said, 'By Allah, we have
     not come to harm you, but we are passing by
     you on our way to do something for the Prophet.'
     But (the infidels) killed them. The Prophet
     therefore invoked evil upon them for a month
     during the morning prayer. That was the
     beginning of Al Qunut and we used not to say
     Qunut before that." A man asked Anas about
     Al-Qunut, "Is it to be said after the Bowing (in
     the prayer) or after finishing the Recitation (i.e.
     before Bowing)?" Anas replied, "No, but (it is to
     be said) after finishing the Recitation." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 415: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle said Al-Qunut for one month
     after the posture of Bowing, invoking evil upon
     some 'Arab tribes. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 416: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     (The tribes of) Ril, Dhakwan, 'Usaiya and Bani
     Lihyan asked Allah's Apostle to provide them
     with some men to support them against their
     enemy. He therefore provided them with seventy
     men from the Ansar whom we used to call
     Al-Qurra' in their lifetime. They used to collect
     wood by daytime and pray at night. When they
     were at the well of Ma'una, the infidels killed
     them by betraying them. When this news reached
     the Prophet , he said Al-Qunut for one month In
     the morning prayer, invoking evil upon some of
     the 'Arab tribes, upon Ril, Dhakwan, 'Usaiya and
     Bani Libyan. We used to read a verse of the
     Qur'an revealed in their connection, but later the
     verse was cancelled. It was: "convey to our
     people on our behalf the information that we
     have met our Lord, and He is pleased with us,
     and has made us pleased." (Anas bin Malik
     added:) Allah's Prophet said Qunut for one
     month in the morning prayer, invoking evil upon
     some of the 'Arab tribes (namely), Ril, Dhakwan,
     Usaiya, and Bani Libyan. (Anas added:) Those
     seventy Ansari men were killed at the well of
     Mauna. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 417: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     That the Prophet sent his uncle, the brother of
     Um Sulaim at the head of seventy riders. The
     chief of the pagans, 'Amir bin At-Tufail proposed
     three suggestions (to the Prophet ) saying,
     "Choose one of three alternatives: (1) that the
     bedouins will be under your command and the
     townspeople will be under my command; (2) or
     that I will be your successor, (3) or otherwise I
     will attack you with two thousand from Bani
     Ghatafan." But 'Amir was infected with plague in
     the House of Um so-and-so. He said, "Shall I
     stay in the house of a lady from the family of
     so-and-so after having a (swelled) gland like that
     she-camel? Get me my horse." So he died on the
     back of his horse. Then Haram, the brother of
     Um Sulaim and a lame man along with another
     man from so-and-so (tribe) went towards the
     pagans (i.e. the tribe of 'Amir). Haram said (to
     his companions), "Stay near to me, for I will go
     to them. If they (i.e. infidels) should give me
     protection, you will be near to me, and if they
     should kill me, then you should go back to your
     companions. Then Haram went to them and said,
     "Will you give me protection so as to convey the
     message of Allah's Apostle ?" So, he started
     talking to them' but they signalled to a man (to kill
     him) and he went behind him and stabbed him
     (with a spear). He (i.e. Haram) said, "Allahu
     Akbar! I have succeeded, by the Lord of the
     Ka'ba!" The companion of Haram was pursued
     by the infidels, and then they (i.e. Haram's
     companions) were all killed except the lame man
     who was at the top of a mountain. Then Allah
     revealed to us a verse that was among the
     cancelled ones later on. It was: 'We have met our
     Lord and He is pleased with us and has made us
     pleased.' (After this event) the Prophet invoked
     evil on the infidels every morning for 30 days. He
     invoked evil upon the (tribes of) Ril, Dhakwan,
     Bani Lihyan and Usaiya who disobeyed Allah
     and His Apostle 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 418: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     That when Haram bin Milhan, his uncle was
     stabbed on the day of Bir Ma'una he sprinkled
     his blood over his face and his head this way and
     then said, "I have succeeded, by the Lord of the
     Ka'ba.' 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 419: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Abu Bakr asked the Prophet to allow him to go
     out (of Mecca) when he was greatly annoyed (by
     the infidels). But the Prophet said to him, ''Wait."
     Abu Bakr said, O Allah's Apostle! Do you hope
     that you will be allowed (to migrate)?" Allah's
     Apostle replied, "I hope so." So Abu Bakr
     waited for him till one day Allah's Apostle came
     at noon time and addressed him saying "Let
     whoever is present with you, now leave you."
     Abu Bakr said, "None is present but my two
     daughters." The Prophet said, "Have you noticed
     that I have been allowed to go out (to migrate)?"
     Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's Apostle, I would like
     to accompany you." The Prophet said, "You will
     accompany me." Abu Bakr said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I have got two she-camels which I had
     prepared and kept ready for (our) going out." So
     he gave one of the two (she-camels) to the
     Prophet and it was Al-Jad'a . They both rode
     and proceeded till they reached the Cave at the
     mountain of Thaur where they hid themselves.
     Amir bin Fuhaira was the slave of 'Abdullah bin
     Al-Tufail bin Sakhbara 'Aisha's brother from her
     mother's side. Abu Bakr had a milch she-camel.
     Amir used to go with it (i.e. the milch she-camel)
     in the afternoon and come back to them before
     noon by setting out towards them in the early
     morning when it was still dark and then he would
     take it to the pasture so that none of the
     shepherds would be aware of his job. When the
     Prophet (and Abu Bakr) went away (from the
     Cave), he (i.e. 'Amir) too went along with them
     and they both used to make him ride at the back
     of their camels in turns till they reached Medina.
     'Amir bin Fuhaira was martyred on the day of Bir
     Ma'una. 

     Narrated 'Urwa: When those (Muslims) at Bir
     Ma'una were martyred and 'Amr bin Umaiya
     Ad-Damri was taken prisoner, 'Amir bin
     At-Tufail, pointing at a killed person, asked Amr,
     "Who is this?" 'Amr bin Umaiya said to him, "He
     is 'Amir bin Fuhaira." 'Amir bin At-Tufail said, "I
     saw him lifted to the sky after he was killed till I
     saw the sky between him and the earth, and then
     he was brought down upon the earth. Then the
     news of the killed Muslims reached the Prophet
     and he announced the news of their death saying,
     "Your companions (of Bir Ma'una) have been
     killed, and they have asked their Lord saying, 'O
     our Lord! Inform our brothers about us as we
     are pleased with You and You are pleased with
     us." So Allah informed them (i.e. the Prophet and
     his companions) about them (i.e. martyrs of Bir
     Mauna). 

     On that day, 'Urwa bin Asma bin As-Salt who
     was one of them, was killed, and Urwa (bin
     Az-Zubair) was named after 'Urwa bin Asma
     and Mundhir (bin AzZubair) was named after
     Mundhir bin 'Amr (who had also been martyred
     on that day). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 420: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said Al-Qunut after Bowing (i.e.
     Ar-Ruku') for one month, invoking evil upon (the
     tribes of) Ril and Dhakwan. He used to say,
     "Usaiya disobeyed Allah and His Apostle." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 421: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik : 

     The Prophet invoked evil upon those (people)
     who killed his companions at Bir Mauna for 30
     days (in the morning prayer). He invoked evil
     upon (tribes of) Ril, Lihyan and Usaiya who
     disobeyed Allah and His Apostle. Allah revealed
     a Quranic Verse to His Prophet regarding those
     who had been killed, i.e. the Muslims killed at Bir
     Ma'una, and we recited the Verse till later it was
     cancelled. (The Verse was:) 'Inform our people
     that we have met our Lord, and He is pleased
     with us, and we are pleased with Him." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 422: 

     Narrated Asim Al-Ahwal: 

     I asked Anas bin Malik regarding Al-Qunut
     during the prayer. Anas replied, "Yes (Al-Qunut
     was said by the Prophet in the prayer)." I said,
     "Is it before Bowing or after Bowing?" Anas
     replied, "(It was said) before (Bowing)." I said,
     "So-and-so informed me that you told him that it
     was said after Bowing." Anas replied, "He was
     mistaken, for Allah's Apostle said Al-Qunut after
     Bowing for one month. The Prophet had sent
     some people called Al-Qurra who were seventy
     in number, to some pagan people who had
     concluded a peace treaty with Allah's Apostle .
     But those who had concluded the treaty with
     Allah's Apostle violated the treaty (and martyred
     all the seventy men). So Allah's Apostle said
     Al-Qunut after Bowing (in the prayer) for one
     month, invoking evil upon them. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 423: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     That the Prophet inspected him on the day of
     Uhud while he was fourteen years old, and the
     Prophet did not allow him to take part in the
     battle. He was inspected again by the Prophet on
     the day of Al-Khandaq (i.e. battle of the Trench)
     while he was fifteen years old, and the Prophet
     allowed him to take Part in the battle. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 424: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     We were with Allah's Apostle in the Trench, and
     some were digging the trench while we were
     carrying the earth on our shoulders. Allah's
     Apostle said, 'O Allah! There is no life except the
     life of the Hereafter, so please forgive the
     Emigrants and the Ansar." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 425: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle went out towards the Khandaq
     (i.e. Trench) and saw the Emigrants and the
     Ansar digging the trench in the cold morning.
     They had no slaves to do that (work) for them.
     When the Prophet saw their hardship and
     hunger, he said, 'O Allah! The real life is the life
     of the Hereafter, so please forgive Ansar and the
     Emigrants." They said in reply to him, "We are
     those who have given the Pledge of allegiances to
     Muhammad for to observe Jihad as long as we
     live." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 426: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Al-Muhajirun (i.e. the Emigrants) and the Ansar
     were digging the trench around Medina and were
     carrying the earth on their backs while saying,
     "We are those who have given the pledge of
     allegiance to Muhammad for Islam as long as we
     live." The Prophet said in reply to their saying, "O
     Allah! There is no goodness except the goodness
     of the Hereafter; so please grant Your Blessing
     to the Ansar and the Emigrants." The people
     used to bring a handful of barley, and a meal
     used to be prepared thereof by cooking it with a
     cooking material (i.e. oil, fat and butter having a
     change in color and smell) and it used to be
     presented to the people (i.e. workers) who were
     hungry, and it used to stick to their throats and
     had a nasty smell. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 427: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     We were digging (the trench) on the day of
     (Al-Khandaq ( i.e. Trench )) and we came
     across a big solid rock. We went to the Prophet
     and said, "Here is a rock appearing across the
     trench." He said, "I am coming down." Then he
     got up, and a stone was tied to his belly for we
     had not eaten anything for three days. So the
     Prophet took the spade and struck the big solid
     rock and it became like sand. I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Allow me to go home." (When the
     Prophet allowed me) I said to my wife, "I saw
     the Prophet in a state that I cannot treat lightly.
     Have you got something (for him to eat?" She
     replied, "I have barley and a she goat." So I
     slaughtered the she-kid and she ground the
     barley; then we put the meat in the earthenware
     cooking pot. Then I came to the Prophet when
     the dough had become soft and fermented and
     (the meat in) the pot over the stone trivet had
     nearly been well-cooked, and said, "I have got a
     little food prepared, so get up O Allah's Apostle,
     you and one or two men along with you (for the
     food)." The Prophet asked, "How much is that
     food?" I told him about it. He said, "It is
     abundant and good. Tell your wife not to remove
     the earthenware pot from the fire and not to take
     out any bread from the oven till I reach there."
     Then he said (to all his companions), "Get up."
     So the Muhajirn (i.e. Emigrants) and the Ansar
     got up. When I came to my wife, I said, "Allah's
     Mercy be upon you! The Prophet came along
     with the Muhajirin and the Ansar and those who
     were present with them." She said, "Did the
     Prophet ask you (how much food you had)?" I
     replied, "Yes." Then the Prophet said, "Enter and
     do not throng." The Prophet started cutting the
     bread (into pieces) and put the cooked meat
     over it. He covered the earthenware pot and the
     oven whenever he took something out of them.
     He would give the food to his companions and
     take the meat out of the pot. He went on cutting
     the bread and scooping the meat (for his
     companions) till they all ate their fill, and even
     then, some food remained. Then the Prophet said
     (to my wife), "Eat and present to others as the
     people are struck with hunger." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 428: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     When the Trench was dug, I saw the Prophet in
     the state of severe hunger. So I returned to my
     wife and said, "Have you got anything (to eat),
     for I have seen Allah's Apostle in a state of
     severe hunger." She brought out for me, a bag
     containing one Sa of barley, and we had a
     domestic she animal (i.e. a kid) which I
     slaughtered then, and my wife ground the barley
     and she finished at the time I finished my job (i.e.
     slaughtering the kid). Then I cut the meat into
     pieces and put it in an earthenware (cooking)
     pot, and returned to Allah's Apostle . My wife
     said, "Do not disgrace me in front of Allah's
     Apostle and those who are with him." So I went
     to him and said to him secretly, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I have slaughtered a she-animal (i.e.
     kid) of ours, and we have ground a Sa of barley
     which was with us. So please come, you and
     another person along with you." The Prophet
     raised his voice and said, "O people of Trench !
     Jabir has prepared a meal so let us go." Allah's
     Apostle said to me, "Don't put down your
     earthenware meat pot (from the fireplace) or
     bake your dough till I come." So I came (to my
     house) and Allah's Apostle too, came,
     proceeding before the people. When I came to
     my wife, she said, "May Allah do so-and-so to
     you." I said, "I have told the Prophet of what you
     said." Then she brought out to him (i.e. the
     Prophet the dough, and he spat in it and invoked
     for Allah's Blessings in it. Then he proceeded
     towards our earthenware meat-pot and spat in it
     and invoked for Allah's Blessings in it. Then he
     said (to my wife). Call a lady-baker to bake
     along with you and keep on taking out scoops
     from your earthenware meat-pot, and do not put
     it down from its fireplace." They were
     one-thousand (who took their meals), and by
     Allah they all ate, and when they left the food and
     went away, our earthenware pot was still
     bubbling (full of meat) as if it had not decreased,
     and our dough was still being baked as if nothing
     had been taken from it. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 429: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     As regards the following Quranic Verse:--
     "When they came on you from above and from
     below you (from east and west of the valley) and
     when the eyes grew wild and the hearts reached
     up to the throats....." (33.10) That happened on
     the day of Al-Khandaq (i.e. Trench). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 430: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The Prophet was carrying earth on the day of
     Al-Khandaq till his abdomen was fully covered
     with dust, and he was saying, "By Allah, without
     Allah we would not have been guided, neither
     would we have given in charity, nor would we
     have prayed. So (O Allah), please send Sakina
     (i.e. calmness) upon us, and make our feet firm if
     we meet the enemy as the enemy have rebelled
     against us, and if they intended affliction, (i.e.
     want to frighten us and fight against us then we
     would not flee but withstand them)." The Prophet
     used to raise his voice saying, "Abaina! Abaina!
     (i.e. would not, we would not)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 431: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "I have been made victorious
     by As-Saba (i.e. an easterly wind) and the Ad
     nation was destroyed by Ad-Dabur (i.e. a
     westerly wind)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 432: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     When it was the day of Al-Ahzab (i.e. the clans)
     and Allah's Apostle dug the trench, I saw him
     carrying earth out of the trench till dust made the
     skin of his abdomen out of my sight and he was a
     hairy man. I heard him reciting the poetic verses
     composed by Ibn Rawaha while he was carrying
     the earth, "O Allah! Without You we would not
     have been guided, nor would we have given in
     charity, nor would we have prayed. So, (O
     Allah), please send Sakina (i.e. calmness) upon
     us and make our feet firm if we meet the enemy,
     as they have rebelled against us. And if they
     intend affliction (i.e. want to frighten us, and fight
     against us) then we would not (flee but withstand
     them)." The Prophet would then prolong his
     voice at the last words. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 433: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The first day (i.e. Ghazwa) I participated in, was
     the day of Al-Khandaq (i.e. Trench). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 434: 

     Narrated Ikrima bin Khalid: 

     Ibn 'Umar said, "I went to Hafsa while water was
     dribbling from her twined braids. I said, 'The
     condition of the people is as you see, and no
     authority has been given to me.' Hafsa said, (to
     me), 'Go to them, and as they (i.e. the people)
     are waiting for you, and I am afraid your absence
     from them will produce division amongst them.' "
     So Hafsa did not leave Ibn 'Umar till we went to
     them. When the people differed. Muawiya
     addressed the people saying, "'If anybody wants
     to say anything in this matter of the Caliphate, he
     should show up and not conceal himself, for we
     are more rightful to be a Caliph than he and his
     father." On that, Habib bin Masalama said (to
     Ibn 'Umar), "Why don't you reply to him (i.e.
     Muawiya)?" 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "I untied
     my garment that was going round my back and
     legs while I was sitting and was about to say, 'He
     who fought against you and against your father
     for the sake of Islam, is more rightful to be a
     Caliph,' but I was afraid that my statement might
     produce differences amongst the people and
     cause bloodshed, and my statement might be
     interpreted not as I intended. (So I kept quiet)
     remembering what Allah has prepared in the
     Gardens of Paradise (for those who are patient
     and prefer the Hereafter to this worldly life)."
     Habib said, "You did what kept you safe and
     secure (i.e. you were wise in doing so)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 435: 

     Narrated Sulaiman bin Surd: 

     On the day of Al-Ahzab (i.e. clans) the Prophet
     said, (After this battle) we will go to attack
     them(i.e. the infidels) and they will not come to
     attack us." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 436: 

     Narrated Sulaiman bin Surd: 

     When the clans were driven away, I heard the
     Prophet saying, "From now onwards we will go
     to attack them (i.e. the infidels) and they will not
     come to attack us, but we will go to them." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 437: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     On the day of Al-Khandaq (i.e. Trench), the
     Prophet said '(Let) Allah fill their (i.e. the
     infidels') houses and graves with fire just as they
     have prevented us from offering the Middle
     Prayer (i.e. 'Asr prayer) till the sun had set." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 438: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Umar bin Al-Khattab came on the day of
     Al-Khandaq after the sun had set and he was
     abusing the infidels of Quraish saying, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I was unable to offer the ('Asr) prayer
     till the sun was about to set." The Prophet said,
     "By Allah, I have not offered this (i.e. 'Asr)
     prayer." So we came down along with the
     Prophet to Buthan where he performed ablution
     for the prayer and then we performed the
     ablution for it. Then he offered the 'Asr prayer
     after the sun had set, and after it he offered the
     Maghrib prayer. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 439: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     On the day of Al-Ahzab (i.e. clans), Allah's
     Apostle said, 'Who will bring us the news of the
     people (i.e. the clans of Quraish infidels)?"
     Az-Zubair said, "I." The Prophet again said,
     "Who will bring us the news of the people?"
     AzZubair said, "I." The Prophet again said, "Who
     will bring us the news of the people?" Az-Zubair
     said, "I." The Prophet then said, "Every prophet
     has his Hawari (i.e. disciple-special helper); my
     disciple is Az-Zubair. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 440: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle used to say, "None has the right
     to be worshipped except Allah Alone (Who)
     honored His Warriors and made His Slave
     victorious, and He (Alone) defeated the (infidel)
     clans; so there is nothing after Him. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 441: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi 'Aufa: 

     Allah's Apostle invoked evil upon the clans
     saying, "Allah, the Revealer of the Holy Book
     (i.e. the Quran), the Quick Taker of the
     accounts! Please defeat the clans. O Allah!
     Defeat them and shake them." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 442: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle returned from a
     Ghazwa, Hajj or 'Umra, he used to start (saying),
     "Allahu-Akbar," thrice and then he would say,
     "None has the right to be worshipped except
     Allah alone Who has no partners. To Him
     belongs the Kingdom, all praises are for Him,
     and He is able to do all things (i.e. Omnipotent).
     We are returning with repentance (to Allah)
     worshipping, prostrating, and praising our Lord.
     Allah has fulfilled His Promise, made His Slave
     victorious, and He (Alone) defeated the clans (of
     infidels) ." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 443: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When the Prophet returned from Al-Khandaq
     (i.e. Trench) and laid down his arms and took a
     bath, Gabriel came and said (to the Prophet ),
     You have laid down your arms? By Allah, we
     angels have not laid them down yet. So set out
     for them." The Prophet said, "Where to go?"
     Gabriel said, "Towards this side," pointing
     towards Banu Quraiza. So the Prophet went out
     towards them. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 444: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     As if I am just now looking at the dust rising in
     the street of Banu Ghanm (in Medina) because of
     the marching of Gabriel's regiment when Allah's
     Apostle set out to Banu Quraiza (to attack
     them). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 445: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     On the day of Al-Ahzab (i.e. Clans) the Prophet
     said, "None of you Muslims) should offer the
     'Asr prayer but at Banu Quraiza's place." The
     'Asr prayer became due for some of them on the
     way. Some of those said, "We will not offer it till
     we reach it, the place of Banu Quraiza," while
     some others said, "No, we will pray at this spot,
     for the Prophet did not mean that for us." Later
     on It was mentioned to the Prophet and he did
     not berate any of the two groups. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 446: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Some (of the Ansar) used to present date palm
     trees to the Prophet till Banu Quraiza and Banu
     An-Nadir were conquered (then he returned to
     the people their date palms). My people ordered
     me to ask the Prophet to return some or all the
     date palms they had given to him, but the
     Prophet had given those trees to Um Aiman. On
     that, Um Aiman came and put the garment
     around my neck and said, "No, by Him except
     Whom none has the right to be worshipped, he
     will not return those trees to you as he (i.e. the
     Prophet ) has given them to me." The Prophet go
     said (to her), "Return those trees and I will give
     you so much (instead of them)." But she kept on
     refusing, saying, "No, by Allah," till he gave her
     ten times the number of her date palms. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 447: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The people of (Banu) Quraiza agreed to accept
     the verdict of Sad bin Mu'adh. So the Prophet
     sent for Sad, and the latter came (riding) a
     donkey and when he approached the Mosque,
     the Prophet said to the Ansar, "Get up for your
     chief or for the best among you." Then the
     Prophet said (to Sad)." These (i.e. Banu
     Quraiza) have agreed to accept your verdict."
     Sad said, "Kill their (men) warriors and take their
     offspring as captives, "On that the Prophet said,
     "You have judged according to Allah's
     Judgment," or said, "according to the King's
     judgment." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 448: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Sad was wounded on the day of Khandaq (i.e.
     Trench) when a man from Quraish, called
     Hibban bin Al-'Araqa hit him (with an arrow).
     The man was Hibban bin Qais from (the tribe of)
     Bani Mais bin 'Amir bin Lu'ai who shot an arrow
     at Sad's medial arm vein (or main artery of the
     arm). The Prophet pitched a tent (for Sad) in the
     Mosque so that he might be near to the Prophet
     to visit. When the Prophet returned from the
     (battle) of Al-Khandaq (i.e. Trench) and laid
     down his arms and took a bath Gabriel came to
     him while he (i.e. Gabriel) was shaking the dust
     off his head, and said, "You have laid down the
     arms?" By Allah, I have not laid them down. Go
     out to them (to attack them)." The Prophet said,
     "Where?" Gabriel pointed towards Bani Quraiza.
     So Allah's Apostle went to them (i.e. Banu
     Quraiza) (i.e. besieged them). They then
     surrendered to the Prophet's judgment but he
     directed them to Sad to give his verdict
     concerning them. Sad said, "I give my judgment
     that their warriors should be killed, their women
     and children should be taken as captives, and
     their properties distributed." 

     Narrated Hisham: My father informed me that
     'Aisha said, "Sad said, "O Allah! You know that
     there is nothing more beloved to me than to fight
     in Your Cause against those who disbelieved
     Your Apostle and turned him out (of Mecca). O
     Allah! I think you have put to an end the fight
     between us and them (i.e. Quraish infidels). And
     if there still remains any fight with the Quraish
     (infidels), then keep me alive till I fight against
     them for Your Sake. But if you have brought the
     war to an end, then let this wound burst and
     cause my death thereby.' So blood gushed from
     the wound. There was a tent in the Mosque
     belonging to Banu Ghifar who were surprised by
     the blood flowing towards them . They said, 'O
     people of the tent! What is this thing which is
     coming to us from your side?' Behold! Blood
     was flowing profusely out of Sad's wound. Sad
     then died because of that." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 449: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The Prophet said to Hassan, "Abuse them (with
     your poems), and Gabriel is with you (i.e,
     supports you)." (Through another group of sub
     narrators) Al-Bara bin Azib said, "On the day of
     Quraiza's (besiege), Allah's Apostle said to
     Hassan bin Thabit, 'Abuse them (with your
     poems), and Gabriel is with you (i.e. supports
     you).' " 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 450: 

     Narrated Abu Burda: 

     Abu Musa said, "We went out in the company of
     the Prophet for a Ghazwa and we were six
     persons having one camel which we rode in
     rotation. So, (due to excessive walking) our feet
     became thin and my feet became thin and my nail
     dropped, and we used to wrap our feet with the
     pieces of cloth, and for this reason, the Ghazwa
     was named Dhat-ur-Riqa as we wrapped our
     feet with rags." When Abu- Musa narrated this
     (Hadith), he felt regretful to do so and said, as if
     he disliked to have disclosed a good deed of his. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 451: 

     Narrated Salih bin Khawwat: 

     Concerning those who witnessed the Fear Prayer
     that was performed in the battle of Dhat-ur-Riqa'
     in the company of Allah's Apostle; One batch
     lined up behind him while another batch (lined
     up) facing the enemy. The Prophet led the batch
     that was with him in one Rak'a, and he stayed in
     the standing posture while that batch completed
     their (two Rakat) prayer by themselves and went
     away, lining in the face of the enemy, while the
     other batch came and he (i.e. the Prophet)
     offered his remaining Rak'a with them, and then,
     kept on sitting till they completed their prayer by
     themselves, and he then finished his prayer with
     Taslim along with them. 

     Narrated Ibn Az-Zubair: Jabir said, "We were
     with the Prophet at Nakhl," and then he
     mentioned the Fear prayer. 

     Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad: The
     Prophet offered the Fear prayer in the Ghazwa
     of Banu Anmar. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 452: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Abi Hathma: 

     (describing the Fear prayer): The Imam stands
     up facing the Qibla and one batch of them (i.e.
     the army) (out of the two) prays along with him
     and the other batch faces the enemy. The Imam
     offers one Rak'a with the first batch they
     themselves stand up alone and offer one bowing
     and two prostrations while they are still in their
     place, and then go away to relieve the second
     batch, and the second batch comes (and takes
     the place of the first batch in the prayer behind
     the Imam) and he offers the second Rak'a with
     them. So he completes his two-Rak'at and then
     the second batch bows and prostrates two
     prostrations (i.e. complete their second Rak'a
     and thus all complete their prayer) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 453: 

     Narrated Salih bin Hathma: 

     The Prophet said as above (Hadith 452). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 454: 

     Narrated Salih bin Khawwat: 

     Sahl said as above (Hadith 452). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 455: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     I took part in a Ghazwa towards Najd along with
     Allah's Apostle and we clashed with the enemy,
     and we lined up for them. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 456: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle led the Fear-prayer with one of
     the two batches of the army while the other
     (batch) faced the enemy. Then the first batch
     went away and took places of their companions
     (i.e. second batch) and the second batch came
     and he led his second Rak'a with them. Then he
     (i.e. the Prophet: finished his prayer with Taslim
     and then each of the two batches got up and
     completed their remaining one Rak'a. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 457: 

     Narrated Sinan and Abu Salama: 

     Jabir mentioned that he had participated in a
     Ghazwa towards Najd in the company of Allah's
     Apostle . 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 458: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     That he fought in a Ghazwa towards Najd along
     with Allah's Apostle and when Allah's Apostle
     returned, he too, returned along with him. The
     time of the afternoon nap overtook them when
     they were in a valley full of thorny trees. Allah's
     Apostle dismounted and the people dispersed
     amongst the thorny trees, seeking the shade of
     the trees. Allah's Apostle took shelter under a
     Samura tree and hung his sword on it. We slept
     for a while when Allah's Apostle suddenly called
     us, and we went to him, to find a bedouin sitting
     with him. Allah's Apostle said, "This (bedouin)
     took my sword out of its sheath while I was
     asleep. When I woke up, the naked sword was
     in his hand and he said to me, 'Who can save you
     from me?, I replied, 'Allah.' Now here he is
     sitting." Allah's Apostle did not punish him (for
     that). 

     Through another group of narrators, Jabir said,
     "We were in the company of the Prophet (during
     the battle of) Dhat-ur-Riqa', and we came across
     a shady tree and we left it for the Prophet (to
     take rest under its shade). A man from the
     pagans came while the Prophet's sword was
     hanging on the tree. He took it out of its sheath
     secretly and said (to the Prophet ), 'Are you
     afraid of me?' The Prophet said, 'No.' He said,
     'Who can save you from me?' The Prophet said,
     Allah.' The companions of the Prophet
     threatened him, then the Iqama for the prayer
     was announced and the Prophet offered a two
     Rakat Fear prayer with one of the two batches,
     and that batch went aside and he offered two
     Rak'a-t with the other batch. So the Prophet
     offered four Rakat but the people offered two
     Rakat only." (The sub-narrator) Abu Bishr
     added, "The man was Ghaurath bin Al-Harith
     and the battle was waged against Muharib
     Khasafa." Jabir added, "We were with the
     Prophet at Nakhl and he offered the Fear
     prayer." Abu Huraira said, "I offered the Fear
     prayer with the Prophet during the Ghazwa (i.e.
     the battle) of Najd." Abu Huraira came to the
     Prophet during the day of Khaibar. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 459: 

     Narrated Ibn Muhairiz: 

     I entered the Mosque and saw Abu Said
     Al-Khudri and sat beside him and asked him
     about Al-Azl (i.e. coitus interruptus). Abu Said
     said, "We went out with Allah's Apostle for the
     Ghazwa of Banu Al-Mustaliq and we received
     captives from among the Arab captives and we
     desired women and celibacy became hard on us
     and we loved to do coitus interruptus. So when
     we intended to do coitus interrupt us, we said,
     'How can we do coitus interruptus before asking
     Allah's Apostle who is present among us?" We
     asked (him) about it and he said, 'It is better for
     you not to do so, for if any soul (till the Day of
     Resurrection) is predestined to exist, it will exist."


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 460: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     We took part in the Ghazwa of Najd along with
     Allah's Apostle and when the time for the
     afternoon rest approached while he was in a
     valley with plenty of thorny trees, he dismounted
     under a tree and rested in its shade and hung his
     sword (on it). The people dispersed amongst the
     trees in order to have shade. While we were in
     this state, Allah's Apostle called us and we came
     and found a bedouin sitting in front of him. The
     Prophet said, "This (Bedouin) came to me while I
     was asleep, and he took my sword stealthily. I
     woke up while he was standing by my head,
     holding my sword without its sheath. He said,
     'Who will save you from me?' I replied, 'Allah.'
     So he sheathed it (i.e. the sword) and sat down,
     and here he is." But Allah's Apostle did not
     punish him. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 461: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah Al-Ansari: 

     I saw the Prophet offering his Nawafil prayer on
     his Mount facing the East during the Ghazwa of
     Anmar. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 462: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to go on a
     journey, he used to draw lots amongst his wives,
     and Allah's Apostle used to take with him the
     one on whom lot fell. He drew lots amongst us
     during one of the Ghazwat which he fought. The
     lot fell on me and so I proceeded with Allah's
     Apostle after Allah's order of veiling (the women)
     had been revealed. I was carried (on the back of
     a camel) in my howdah and carried down while
     still in it (when we came to a halt). So we went
     on till Allah's Apostle had finished from that
     Ghazwa of his and returned. 

     When we approached the city of Medina he
     announced at night that it was time for departure.
     So when they announced the news of departure,
     I got up and went away from the army camps,
     and after finishing from the call of nature, I came
     back to my riding animal. I touched my chest to
     find that my necklace which was made of Zifar
     beads (i.e. Yemenite beads partly black and
     partly white) was missing. So I returned to look
     for my necklace and my search for it detained
     me. (In the meanwhile) the people who used to
     carry me on my camel, came and took my
     howdah and put it on the back of my camel on
     which I used to ride, as they considered that I
     was in it. In those days women were light in
     weight for they did not get fat, and flesh did not
     cover their bodies in abundance as they used to
     eat only a little food. Those people therefore,
     disregarded the lightness of the howdah while
     lifting and carrying it; and at that time I was still a
     young girl. They made the camel rise and all of
     them left (along with it). I found my necklace
     after the army had gone. 

     Then I came to their camping place to find no call
     maker of them, nor one who would respond to
     the call. So I intended to go to the place where I
     used to stay, thinking that they would miss me
     and come back to me (in my search). While I
     was sitting in my resting place, I was
     overwhelmed by sleep and slept. Safwan bin
     Al-Muattal As-Sulami Adh-Dhakwani was
     behind the army. When he reached my place in
     the morning, he saw the figure of a sleeping
     person and he recognized me on seeing me as he
     had seen me before the order of compulsory
     veiling (was prescribed). So I woke up when he
     recited Istirja' (i.e. "Inna lillahi wa inna llaihi
     raji'un") as soon as he recognized me. I veiled my
     face with my head cover at once, and by Allah,
     we did not speak a single word, and I did not
     hear him saying any word besides his Istirja'. He
     dismounted from his camel and made it kneel
     down, putting his leg on its front legs and then I
     got up and rode on it. Then he set out leading the
     camel that was carrying me till we overtook the
     army in the extreme heat of midday while they
     were at a halt (taking a rest). (Because of the
     event) some people brought destruction upon
     themselves and the one who spread the Ifk (i.e.
     slander) more, was 'Abdullah bin Ubai Ibn
     Salul." 

     (Urwa said, "The people propagated the slander
     and talked about it in his (i.e. 'Abdullah's)
     presence and he confirmed it and listened to it
     and asked about it to let it prevail." Urwa also
     added, "None was mentioned as members of the
     slanderous group besides ('Abdullah) except
     Hassan bin Thabit and Mistah bin Uthatha and
     Hamna bint Jahsh along with others about whom
     I have no knowledge, but they were a group as
     Allah said. It is said that the one who carried
     most of the slander was 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin
     Salul." Urwa added, "'Aisha disliked to have
     Hassan abused in her presence and she used to
     say, 'It was he who said: My father and his (i.e.
     my father's) father and my honor are all for the
     protection of Muhammad's honor from you."). 

     'Aisha added, "After we returned to Medina, I
     became ill for a month. The people were
     propagating the forged statements of the
     slanderers while I was unaware of anything of all
     that, but I felt that in my present ailment, I was
     not receiving the same kindness from Allah's
     Apostle as I used to receive when I got sick.
     (But now) Allah's Apostle would only come,
     greet me and say,' How is that (lady)?' and leave.
     That roused my doubts, but I did not discover
     the evil (i.e. slander) till I went out after my
     convalescence, I went out with Um Mistah to
     Al-Manasi' where we used to answer the call of
     nature and we used not to go out (to answer the
     call of nature) except at night, and that was
     before we had latrines near our houses. And this
     habit of our concerning evacuating the bowels,
     was similar to the habits of the old 'Arabs living in
     the deserts, for it would be troublesome for us to
     take latrines near our houses. So I and Um
     Mistah who was the daughter of Abu Ruhm bin
     Al-Muttalib bin Abd Manaf, whose mother was
     the daughter of Sakhr bin 'Amir and the aunt of
     Abu Bakr As-Siddiq and whose son was Mistah
     bin Uthatha bin 'Abbas bin Al-Muttalib, went
     out. I and Um Mistah returned to my house after
     we finished answering the call of nature. Um
     Mistah stumbled by getting her foot entangled in
     her covering sheet and on that she said, 'Let
     Mistah be ruined!' I said, 'What a hard word you
     have said. Do you abuse a man who took part in
     the battle of Badr?' On that she said, 'O you
     Hantah! Didn't you hear what he (i.e. Mistah)
     said? 'I said, 'What did he say?' 

     Then she told me the slander of the people of Ifk.
     So my ailment was aggravated, and when I
     reached my home, Allah's Apostle came to me,
     and after greeting me, said, 'How is that (lady)?' I
     said, 'Will you allow me to go to my parents?' as
     I wanted to be sure about the news through
     them. Allah's Apostle allowed me (and I went to
     my parents) and asked my mother, 'O mother!
     What are the people talking about?' She said, 'O
     my daughter! Don't worry, for scarcely is there a
     charming woman who is loved by her husband
     and whose husband has other wives besides
     herself that they (i.e. women) would find faults
     with her.' I said, 'Subhan-Allah! (I testify the
     uniqueness of Allah). Are the people really
     talking in this way?' I kept on weeping that night
     till dawn I could neither stop weeping nor sleep
     then in the morning again, I kept on weeping.
     When the Divine Inspiration was delayed. 

     Allah's Apostle called 'Ali bin Abi Talib and
     Usama bin Zaid to ask and consult them about
     divorcing me. Usama bin Zaid said what he knew
     of my innocence, and the respect he preserved in
     himself for me. Usama said, '(O Allah's Apostle!)
     She is your wife and we do not know anything
     except good about her.' 'Ali bin Abi Talib said,
     'O Allah's Apostle! Allah does not put you in
     difficulty and there are plenty of women other
     than she, yet, ask the maid-servant who will tell
     you the truth.' On that Allah's Apostle called
     Barira (i.e. the maid-servant) and said, 'O Barira!
     Did you ever see anything which aroused your
     suspicion?' Barira said to him, 'By Him Who has
     sent you with the Truth. I have never seen
     anything in her (i.e. Aisha) which I would
     conceal, except that she is a young girl who
     sleeps leaving the dough of her family exposed so
     that the domestic goats come and eat it.' 

     So, on that day, Allah's Apostle got up on the
     pulpit and complained about 'Abdullah bin Ubai
     (bin Salul) before his companions, saying, 'O you
     Muslims! Who will relieve me from that man who
     has hurt me with his evil statement about my
     family? By Allah, I know nothing except good
     about my family and they have blamed a man
     about whom I know nothing except good and he
     used never to enter my home except with me.'
     Sad bin Mu'adh the brother of Banu 'Abd
     Al-Ashhal got up and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! I
     will relieve you from him; if he is from the tribe of
     Al-Aus, then I will chop his head off, and if he is
     from our brothers, i.e. Al-Khazraj, then order us,
     and we will fulfill your order.' On that, a man
     from Al-Khazraj got up. Um Hassan, his cousin,
     was from his branch tribe, and he was Sad bin
     Ubada, chief of Al-Khazraj. Before this incident,
     he was a pious man, but his love for his tribe
     goaded him into saying to Sad (bin Mu'adh). 'By
     Allah, you have told a lie; you shall not and
     cannot kill him. If he belonged to your people,
     you would not wish him to be killed.' 

     On that, Usaid bin Hudair who was the cousin of
     Sad (bin Mu'adh) got up and said to Sad bin
     'Ubada, 'By Allah! You are a liar! We will surely
     kill him, and you are a hypocrite arguing on the
     behalf of hypocrites.' On this, the two tribes of
     Al-Aus and Al Khazraj got so much excited that
     they were about to fight while Allah's Apostle
     was standing on the pulpit. Allah's Apostle kept
     on quietening them till they became silent and so
     did he. All that day I kept on weeping with my
     tears never ceasing, and I could never sleep. 

     In the morning my parents were with me and I
     wept for two nights and a day with my tears
     never ceasing and I could never sleep till I
     thought that my liver would burst from weeping.
     So, while my parents were sitting with me and I
     was weeping, an Ansari woman asked me to
     grant her admittance. I allowed her to come in,
     and when she came in, she sat down and started
     weeping with me. While we were in this state,
     Allah's Apostle came, greeted us and sat down.
     He had never sat with me since that day of the
     slander. A month had elapsed and no Divine
     Inspiration came to him about my case. Allah's
     Apostle then recited Tashah-hud and then said,
     'Amma Badu, O 'Aisha! I have been informed
     so-and-so about you; if you are innocent, then
     soon Allah will reveal your innocence, and if you
     have committed a sin, then repent to Allah and
     ask Him for forgiveness for when a slave
     confesses his sins and asks Allah for forgiveness,
     Allah accepts his repentance.' 

     When Allah's Apostle finished his speech, my
     tears ceased flowing completely that I no longer
     felt a single drop of tear flowing. I said to my
     father, 'Reply to Allah's Apostle on my behalf
     concerning what he has said.' My father said, 'By
     Allah, I do not know what to say to Allah's
     Apostle .' Then I said to my mother, 'Reply to
     Allah's Apostle on my behalf concerning what he
     has said.' She said, 'By Allah, I do not know
     what to say to Allah's Apostle.' In spite of the
     fact that I was a young girl and had a little
     knowledge of Quran, I said, 'By Allah, no doubt
     I know that you heard this (slanderous) speech
     so that it has been planted in your hearts (i.e.
     minds) and you have taken it as a truth. Now if I
     tell you that I am innocent, you will not believe
     me, and if confess to you about it, and Allah
     knows that I am innocent, you will surely believe
     me. By Allah, I find no similitude for me and you
     except that of Joseph's father when he said, '(For
     me) patience in the most fitting against that which
     you assert; it is Allah (Alone) Whose Help can
     be sought.' Then I turned to the other side and
     lay on my bed; and Allah knew then that I was
     innocent and hoped that Allah would reveal my
     innocence. But, by Allah, I never thought that
     Allah would reveal about my case, Divine
     Inspiration, that would be recited (forever) as I
     considered myself too unworthy to be talked of
     by Allah with something of my concern, but I
     hoped that Allah's Apostle might have a dream in
     which Allah would prove my innocence. But, by
     Allah, before Allah's Apostle left his seat and
     before any of the household left, the Divine
     inspiration came to Allah's Apostle. 

     So there overtook him the same hard condition
     which used to overtake him, (when he used to be
     inspired Divinely). The sweat was dropping from
     his body like pearls though it was a wintry day
     and that was because of the weighty statement
     which was being revealed to him. When that
     state of Allah's Apostle was over, he got up
     smiling, and the first word he said was, 'O
     'Aisha! Allah has declared your innocence!' Then
     my Mother said to me, 'Get up and go to him
     (i.e. Allah's Apostle). I replied, 'By Allah, I will
     not go to him, and I praise none but Allah. So
     Allah revealed the ten Verses:-- "Verily! They
     who spread the slander Are a gang, among
     you............." (24.11-20) 

     Allah revealed those Quranic Verses to declare
     my innocence. Abu Bakr As-Siddiq who used to
     disburse money for Mistah bin Uthatha because
     of his relationship to him and his poverty, said,
     'By Allah, I will never give to Mistah bin Uthatha
     anything after what he has said about Aisha.'
     Then Allah revealed:-- 

     "And let not those among you who are good and
     wealthy swear not to give (any sort of help) to
     their kinsmen, those in need, and those who have
     left their homes for Allah's cause, let them pardon
     and forgive. Do you not love that Allah should
     forgive you? And Allah is oft-Forgiving Most
     Merciful." (24.22) 

     Abu Bakr As-Siddiq said, 'Yes, by Allah, I
     would like that Allah forgive me.' and went on
     giving Mistah the money he used to give him
     before. He also added, 'By Allah, I will never
     deprive him of it at all.' 

     Aisha further said:." Allah's Apostle also asked
     Zainab bint Jahsh (i.e. his wife) about my case.
     He said to Zainab, 'What do you know and what
     did you see?" She replied, "O Allah's Apostle! I
     refrain from claiming falsely that I have heard or
     seen anything. By Allah, I know nothing except
     good (about 'Aisha).' From amongst the wives of
     the Prophet Zainab was my peer (in beauty and
     in the love she received from the Prophet) but
     Allah saved her from that evil because of her
     piety. Her sister Hamna, started struggling on her
     behalf and she was destroyed along with those
     who were destroyed. The man who was blamed
     said, 'Subhan-Allah! By Him in Whose Hand my
     soul is, I have never uncovered the cover (i.e.
     veil) of any female.' Later on the man was
     martyred in Allah's Cause." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 463: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: 

     Al-Walid bin 'Abdul Malik said to me, "Have
     you heard that 'Ali' was one of those who
     slandered 'Aisha?" I replied, "No, but two men
     from your people (named) Abu Salama bin
     'Abdur-Rahman and Abu Bakr bin
     Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Harith have informed me
     that Aisha told them that 'Ali remained silent
     about her case." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 464: 

     Narrated Masruq bin Al-Aida: 

     Um Ruman, the mother of 'Aisha said that while
     'Aisha and she were sitting, an Ansari woman
     came and said, "May Allah harm such and-such
     a person!" Um Ruman said to her, What is the
     matter?" She replied, "My son was amongst
     those who talked of the story (of the Slander)."
     Um Ruman said, "What is that?" She said,
     "So-and-so...." and narrated the whole story. On
     that 'Aisha said, "Did Allah's Apostle hear about
     that?" She replies, "yes." 'Aisha further said,
     "And Abu Bakr too?" She replied, "Yes." On
     that, 'Aisha fell down fainting, and when she
     came to her senses, she had got fever with rigors.
     I put her clothes over her and covered her. The
     Prophet came and asked, "What is wrong with
     this (lady)?" Um Ruman replied, "O Allah's
     Apostle! She (i.e. 'Aisha) has got temperature
     with rigors." He said, "Perhaps it is because of
     the story that has been talked about?" She said,
     "Yes." 'Aisha sat up and said, "By Allah, if I took
     an oath (that I am innocent), you would not
     believe me, and if I said (that I am not innocent),
     you would not excuse me. My and your example
     is like that of Jacob and his sons (as Jacob said ):
     'It is Allah (Alone) Whose Help can be sought
     against that you assert.' Um Ruman said, "The
     Prophet then went out saying nothing. Then Allah
     declared her innocence. On that, 'Aisha said (to
     the Prophet), "I thank Allah only; thank neither
     anybody else nor you." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 465: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Malaika: 

     'Aisha used to recite this Verse:-- 'Ida taliqunahu
     bi-alsinatikum' (24.15) "(As you tell lie with your
     tongues.)" and used to say "Al-Walaq" means
     "telling of a lie. "She knew this Verse more than
     anybody else as it was revealed about her. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 466: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     I started abusing Hassan in front of 'Aisha. She
     said, "Do not abuse him as he used to defend
     Allah's Apostle (against the infidels). 'Aisha
     added, "Once Hassan took the permission from
     the Prophet to say poetic verses against the
     infidels. On that the Prophet said, 'How will you
     exclude my forefathers (from that)? Hassan
     replied, 'I will take you out of them as one takes
     a hair out of the dough." Hisham's father added,
     "I abused Hassan as he was one of those who
     spoke against 'Aisha." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 467: 

     Narrated Masruq: 

     We went to 'Aisha while Hassan bin Thabit was
     with her reciting poetry to her from some of his
     poetic verses, saying "A chaste wise lady about
     whom nobody can have suspicion. She gets up
     with an empty stomach because she never eats
     the flesh of indiscreet (ladies)." 'Aisha said to
     him, "But you are not like that." I said to her,
     "Why do you grant him admittance, though Allah
     said:-- "and as for him among them, who had the
     greater share therein, his will be a severe
     torment." (24.11) 

     On that, 'Aisha said, "And what punishment is
     more than blinding?" She, added, "Hassan used
     to defend or say poetry on behalf of Allah's
     Apostle (against the infidels)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 468: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid: 

     We went out with Allah's Apostle in the year of
     Al-Hudaibiya. One night it rained and Allah's
     Apostle led us in the Fajr prayer and (after
     finishing it), turned to us and said, " Do you know
     what your Lord has said?" We replied, "Allah
     and His Apostle know it better." He said, "Allah
     said:-- "(Some of) My slaves got up believing in
     Me, And (some of them) disbelieving in Me. The
     one who said: We have been given Rain through
     Allah's Mercy and Allah's Blessing and Allah's
     Bounty, Then he is a believer in Me, and is a
     Disbeliever in the star. And whoever said: We
     have been given rain because of such-and-such
     star, Then he is a believer in the star, and is a
     disbeliever in Me." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 469: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle performed four 'Umras, all in the
     month of Dhul-Qa'da, except the one which he
     performed with his Hajj (i.e. in Dhul-Hijja). He
     performed one 'Umra from Al-Hudaibiya in
     Dhul-Qa'da, another 'Umra in the following year
     in Dhul Qa'da a third from Al-Jirana where he
     distributed the war booty of Hunain, in Dhul
     Qa'da, and the fourth 'Umra he performed was
     with his Hajj. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 470: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     We set out with the Prophet in the year of
     Al-Hudaibiya, and all his companions assumed
     the state of Ihram but I did not. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 471: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     Do you (people) consider the conquest of
     Mecca, the Victory (referred to in the Qur'an
     48:1). Was the conquest of Mecca a victory?
     We really consider that the actual Victory was
     the Ar-Ridwan Pledge of allegiance which we
     gave on the day of Al-Hudaibiya (to the Prophet)
     . On the day of Al-Hudaibiya we were fourteen
     hundred men along with the Prophet
     Al-Hudaibiya was a well, the water of which we
     used up leaving not a single drop of water in it.
     When the Prophet was informed of that, he came
     and sat on its edge. Then he asked for a utensil
     of water, performed ablution from it, rinsed (his
     mouth), invoked (Allah), and poured the
     remaining water into the well. We stayed there
     for a while and then the well brought forth what
     we required of water for ourselves and our riding
     animals. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 472: 

     Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib: 

     That they were in the company of Allah's Apostle
     on the day of Al-Hudaibiya and their number
     was 1400 or more. They camped at a well and
     drew its water till it was dried. When they
     informed Allah's Apostle of that, he came and sat
     over its edge and said, "Bring me a bucket of its
     water." When it was brought, he spat and
     invoked (Allah) and said, "Leave it for a while."
     Then they quenched their thirst and watered their
     riding animals (from that well) till they departed. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 473: 

     Narrated Salim: 

     Jabir said "On the day of Al-Hudaibiya, the
     people felt thirsty and Allah's Apostle had a
     utensil containing water. He performer ablution
     from it and then the people came towards him.
     Allah's Apostle said, 'What is wrong with you?'
     The people said, 'O Allah's Apostle! We haven't
     got any water to perform ablution with or to
     drink, except what you have in your utensil.' So
     the Prophet put his hand in the utensil and the
     water started spouting out between his fingers
     like springs. So we drank and performed
     ablution." I said to Jabir, "What was your number
     on that day?" He replied, "Even if we had been
     one hundred thousand, that water would have
     been sufficient for us. Anyhow, we were 1500.' 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 474: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     I said to Sa'id bin Al-Musaiyab, "I have been
     informed that Jabir bin 'Abdullah said that the
     number (of Al-Hudaibiya Muslim warriors) was
     1400." Sa'id said to me, "Jabir narrated to me
     that they were 1500 who gave the Pledge of
     allegiance to the Prophet on the day of
     Al-Hudaibiya.' 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 475: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     On the day of Al-Hudaibiya, Allah's Apostle said
     to us' "You are the best people on the earth!"
     We were 1400 then. If I could see now, I would
     have shown you the place of the Tree (beneath
     which the Pledge of allegiance was given by us),"
     Salim said, "Our number was 1400." 'Abdullah
     bin Abi Aufa said, "The people (who gave the
     Pledge of allegiance) under the Tree numbered
     1300 and the number of Bani Aslam was 1/8 of
     the Emigrants." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 476: 

     Narrated Mirdas Al-Aslami: 

     Who was among those (who had given the
     Pledge of allegiance) under the Tree: Pious
     people will die in succession, and there will
     remain the dregs of society who will be like the
     useless residues of dates and barley and Allah
     will pay no attention to them. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 477: 

     Narrated Marwan and Al-Miswar bin
     Makhrama: 

     The Prophet went out in the company of 1300 to
     1500 of his companions in the year of
     Al-Hudaibiya, and when they reached
     Dhul-Hulaifa, he garlanded and marked his Hadi
     and assumed the state of Ihram. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 478: 

     Narrated Kab bin Ujra: 

     That Allah's Apostle saw him with the lice falling
     (from his head) on his face. Allah's Apostle said,
     "Are your lice troubling you? Ka'b said, "Yes."
     Allah's Apostle thus ordered him to shave his
     head while he was at Al-Hudaibiya. Up to then
     there was no indication that all of them would
     finish their state of Ihram and they hoped that
     they would enter Mecca. Then the order of
     Al-Fidya was revealed, so Allah's Apostle
     ordered Kab to feed six poor persons with one
     Faraq of food or slaughter a sheep or fast for
     three days. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 479: 

     Narrated Aslam: 

     Once I went with 'Umar bin Al-Khattab to the
     market. A young woman followed 'Umar and
     said, "O chief of the believers! My husband has
     died, leaving little children. By Allah, they have
     not even a sheep's trotter to cook; they have no
     farms or animals. I am afraid that they may die
     because of hunger, and I am the daughter of
     Khufaf bin Ima Al-Ghafari, and my father
     witnessed the Pledge of allegiance) of
     Al-Hudaibiya with the Prophet.' Umar stopped
     and did not proceed, and said, "I welcome my
     near relative." Then he went towards a strong
     camel which was tied in the house, and carried
     on to it, two sacks he had loaded with food
     grains and put between them money and clothes
     and gave her its rope to hold and said, "Lead it,
     and this provision will not finish till Allah gives
     you a good supply." A man said, "O chief of the
     believers! You have given her too much." "Umar
     said disapprovingly. "May your mother be
     bereaved of you! By Allah, I have seen her father
     and brother besieging a fort for a long time and
     conquering it, and then we were discussing what
     their shares they would have from that war
     booty." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 480: 

     Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab: 

     That his father said, "I saw the Tree (of the
     Ar-Ridwan Pledge of allegiance and when I
     returned to it later, I was not able to recognize it.
     (The sub--narrator MahmiJd said, Al-Musaiyab
     said, 'Then; forgot it (i.e., the Tree).)" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 481: 

     Narrated Tariq bin 'Abdur-Rahman: 

     When I set out for Hajj, I passed by some
     people offering a prayer, I asked, "What is this
     mosque?" They said, "This is the Tree where
     Allah's Apostle took the Ar-Ridwan Pledge of
     allegiance. Then I went to Sa'id bin Musaiyab
     and informed him about it. Said said, "My father
     said that he was amongst those who had given
     the Pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle
     beneath the Tree. He (i.e. my father) said, "When
     we set out the following year, we forgot the Tree
     and were unable to recognize it. "Then Said said
     (perhaps ironically) "The companions of the
     Prophet could not recognize it; nevertheless, you
     do recognize it; therefore you have a better
     knowledge." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 482: 

     Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab: 

     That his father was amongst those who had given
     the Pledge of allegiance (to the Prophet ) beneath
     the Tree, and the next year when they went
     towards the Tree, they were not able to
     recognize it. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 483: 

     Narrated Tariq: 

     (The tree where the Ridwan Pledge of allegiance
     was taken by the Prophet) was mentioned before
     Said bin Al-Musaiyab. On that he smiled and
     said, "My father informed me (about it) and he
     had witnessed it (i.e. the Pledge) ." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 484: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Abi Aufa: 

     (Who was one of those who had given the
     Pledge of allegiance to the Prophet beneath the
     Tree) When the people brought Sadaqa (i.e.
     Rakat) to the Prophet he used to say, "O Allah!
     Bless them with your Mercy." Once my father
     came with his Sadaqa to him whereupon he (i.e.
     the Prophet) said. "O Allah! Bless the family of
     Abu Aufa." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 485: 

     Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim: 

     When it was the day (of the battle) of Al-Harra
     the people were giving Pledge of allegiance to
     Abdullah bin Hanzala. Ibn Zaid said, "For what
     are the people giving Pledge of allegiance to
     Abdullah bin Hanzala?" It was said to him, "For
     death." Ibn Zaid said, "I will never give the
     Pledge of allegiance for that to anybody else after
     Allah's Apostle ." Ibn Zaid was one of those who
     had witnessed the day of Al-Hudaibiya with the
     Prophet. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 486: 

     Narrated Iyas bin Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     My father who was amongst those who had
     given the Pledge of allegiance to the Prophet
     beneath the Tree, said to me, "We used to offer
     the Jumua prayer with the Prophet and then
     depart at a time when the walls had no shade for
     us to take shelter in." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 487: 

     Narrated Yazid bin Abi Ubaid: 

     I said to Salama bin Al-Akwa, "For what did
     you give the Pledge of allegiance to Allah's
     Apostle on the day of Al-Hudaibiya?" He
     replied, "For death (in the Cause of Islam.)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 488: 

     Narrated Al-Musaiyab: 

     I met Al-Bara bin 'Azib and said (to him). "May
     you live prosperously! You enjoyed the company
     of the Prophet and gave him the Pledge of
     allegiance (of Al-Hudaibiya) under the Tree." On
     that, Al-Bara' said, "O my nephew! You do not
     know what we have done after him (i.e. his
     death)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 489: 

     Narrated Abu Qilaba: 

     that Thabit bin Ad-Dahhak had informed him that
     he was one of those who had given the Pledge of
     allegiance (of Al-Hudaibiya) beneath the Tree. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 490: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     regarding Allah's Statement: "Verily! We have
     granted you (O, Muhammad) Manifest victory."
     (48.1) It refers to the Al-Hudaibiya Pledge. And
     the companions of the Prophet said (to the
     Prophet), "Congratulations and happiness for
     you; but what reward shall we get?" So Allah
     revealed:-- "That He may admit the believing
     men and women to gardens beneath which rivers
     flow." (48.5) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 491: 

     Narrated Zahir Al-Aslami: 

     (who was one of those who had witnessed (the
     Pledge of allegiance beneath) the Tree) While I
     was making fire beneath the cooking pots
     containing donkey's meat, the announcer of
     Allah's Apostle announced, "Allah's Apostle
     forbids you to eat donkey's meat." 

     The same narration was told by Majzaa from a
     man called Uhban bin Aus who was one of those
     who had witnessed (the Pledge of allegiance
     beneath) the Tree., and who had some trouble in
     his knee so that while doing prostrations, he used
     to put a pillow underneath his knee. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 492: 

     Narrated Suwaid bin An-Numan: 

     who was one of those who witnessed (the
     Pledge of allegiance beneath) the Tree: Allah's
     Apostle and his companions were given Sawiq
     and they chewed it. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 493: 

     Narrated Abu Jamra: 

     I asked Aidh bin Amr, who was one of the
     companions of the Prophet one of those (who
     gave the allegiance to the Prophet the Tree: "Can
     the Witr prayer be repeated (in one night)?" He
     said, "If you have offered it in the first part of the
     night, you should not repeat it in the last part 'of
     the night." (See Fateh-al-Bari page 458 Vol 8th).


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 494: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Aslam: 

     My father said, "Allah's Apostle was proceeding
     at night on one of his journeys and 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab was going along with him. 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab asked him (about something) but
     Allah's Apostle did not answer him. 'Umar asked
     him again, but he did not answer him. He asked
     him again (for the third time) but he did not
     answer him. On that Umar bin Al-Khattab
     addressed himself saying, "May your mother be
     bereaved of you, O 'Umar, for you have asked
     Allah's Apostle thrice, yet he has not answered
     you." 'Umar said, "Then I made my camel run
     fast and took it in front of the other Muslims, and
     I was afraid that something might be revealed in
     my connection. I had hardly waited for a moment
     when I heard somebody calling me. I said, 'I was
     afraid that something might have been revealed
     about me.' Then I came to Allah's Apostle and
     greeted him. He (i.e. the Prophet) said, 'Tonight
     there has been revealed to me, a Sura which is
     dearer to me than (all the world) on which the
     sun rises,' and then he recited: 'Verily! We have
     granted you (O Muhammad) A manifest victory."
     (48.1) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 495: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and
     Marwan bin Al-Hakam: 

     (one of them said more than his friend): The
     Prophet set out in the company of more than
     one-thousand of his companions in the year of
     Al-Hudaibiya, and when he reached
     Dhul-Hulaifa, he garlanded his Hadi (i.e.
     sacrificing animal), assumed the state of Ihram for
     'Umra from that place and sent a spy of his from
     Khuzi'a (tribe). The Prophet proceeded on till he
     reached (a village called) Ghadir-al-Ashtat.
     There his spy came and said, "The Quraish
     (infidels) have collected a great number of people
     against you, and they have collected against you
     the Ethiopians, and they will fight with you, and
     will stop you from entering the Ka'ba and
     prevent you." The Prophet said, "O people! Give
     me your opinion. Do you recommend that I
     should destroy the families and offspring of those
     who want to stop us from the Ka'ba? If they
     should come to us (for peace) then Allah will
     destroy a spy from the pagans, or otherwise we
     will leave them in a miserable state." On that Abu
     Bakr said, "O Allah Apostle! You have come
     with the intention of visiting this House (i.e.
     Ka'ba) and you do not want to kill or fight
     anybody. So proceed to it, and whoever should
     stop us from it, we will fight him." On that the
     Prophet said, "Proceed on, in the Name of Allah
     !" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 496: 

     Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 

     That he heard Marwan bin Al-Hakam and
     Al-Miswar bin Makhrama relating one of the
     events that happened to Allah's Apostle in the
     'Umra of Al-Hudaibiya. They said, "When
     Allah's Apostle concluded the truce with Suhail
     bin 'Amr on the day of Al-Hudaibiya, one of the
     conditions which Suhail bin 'Amr stipulated, was
     his saying (to the Prophet), "If anyone from us
     (i.e. infidels) ever comes to you, though he has
     embraced your religion, you should return him to
     us, and should not interfere between us and him."
     Suhail refused to conclude the truce with Allah's
     Apostle except on this condition. The believers
     disliked this condition and got disgusted with it
     and argued about it. But when Suhail refused to
     conclude the truce with Allah's Apostle except
     on that condition, Allah's Apostle concluded it.
     Accordingly, Allah's Apostle then returned Abu
     Jandal bin Suhail to his father, Suhail bin 'Amr,
     and returned every man coming to him from them
     during that period even if he was a Muslim. The
     believing women Emigrants came (to Medina)
     and Um Kulthum, the daughter of 'Uqba bin Abi
     Mu'ait was one of those who came to Allah's
     Apostle and she was an adult at that time. Her
     relatives came, asking Allah's Apostle to return
     her to them, and in this connection, Allah
     revealed the Verses dealing with the believing
     (women). Aisha said, "Allah's Apostle used to
     test all the believing women who migrated to him,
     with the following Verse:-- "O Prophet! When
     the believing Women come to you, to give the
     pledge of allegiance to you." (60.12) 

     'Urwa's uncle said, "We were informed when
     Allah ordered His Apostle to return to the
     pagans what they had given to their wives who
     lately migrated (to Medina) and we were
     informed that Abu Basir..." relating the whole
     narration. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 497: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Abdullah bin Umar set out for Umra during the
     period of afflictions, and he said, "If I should be
     stopped from visiting the Kaba, I will do what
     we did when we were with Allah's Apostle." He
     assumed Ihram for 'Umra in the year of
     Al-Hudaibiya. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 498: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar assumed Ihram and said, "If something
     should intervene between me and the Ka'ba, then
     I will do what the Prophet did when the Quraish
     infidels intervened between him and (the Ka'ba).
     Then Ibn 'Umar recited: "You have indeed in
     Allah's Apostle A good example to follow."
     (33.21) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 499: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     One of 'Abdullah's sons said to 'Abdullah (bin
     Umar) "I wish you would stay this year (and not
     perform Hajj) as I am afraid that you will not be
     able to reach the Kaba." On that he (i.e.
     'Abdullah bin Umar) said, "We went out with the
     Prophet (for 'Umra), and when the Quraish
     infidel intervened between us and the Ka'ba, the
     Prophet slaughtered his Hadi and shaved (his
     head), and his companions cut short their hair."
     Then 'Abdullah bin Umar said, "I make you
     witness that I have intended to perform 'Umra
     and if I am allowed to reach the Kaba, I will
     perform the Tawaf, and if something (i.e.
     obstacles) intervene between me and the Kaba,
     then I will do what Allah's Apostle did." Then
     after going for a while, he said, "I consider the
     ceremonies (of both 'Umra and Hajj as one and
     the same, so I would like you to witness that I
     have intended to perform Hajj along with my
     'Umra." So he performed only one Tawaf and
     one Sai (between Safa and Marwa) and finished
     the Ihram of both Umra and Hajj). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 500: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     The people used to say that Ibn 'Umar had
     embraced Islam before 'Umar. This is not true.
     What happened is that 'Umar sent 'Abdullah to
     bring his horse from an Ansari man so as to fight
     on it. At that time the people were giving the
     Pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle near the
     Tree, and 'Umar was not aware of that. So
     Abdullah (bin Umar) gave the Pledge of
     Allegiance (to the Prophet) and went to take the
     horse and brought it to 'Umar. While 'Umar was
     putting on the armor to get ready for fighting,
     'Abdullah informed him that the people were
     giving the Pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle
     beneath the Tree. So 'Umar set out and
     'Abdullah accompanied him till he gave the
     Pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle, and it
     was this event that made people say that Ibn
     'Umar had embraced Islam before 'Umar.
     "Abdullah bin 'Umar added, "The people were
     along with the Prophet on the day of
     Al-Hudaibiya spreading in the shade of the trees.
     Suddenly the people surrounded the Prophet and
     started looking at him." 'Umar said, "O
     'Abdullah! Go and see why the people are
     encircling Allah's Apostle and looking at him."
     'Abdullah bin Umar then saw the people giving
     the Pledge o allegiance to the Prophet. So he
     also gave the Pledge of allegiance and returned
     to 'Umar who went out in his turn and gave the
     Pledge of allegiance to the Prophet.' 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 501: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa: 

     We were in the company of the Prophet when he
     performed the 'Umra. He performed the Tawaf
     and we did the same; he offered the prayer and
     we also offered the prayer with him. Then he
     performed the Sai between Safa and Marwa and
     we were guarding him against the people of
     Mecca so that nobody should harm him. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 502: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     When Sahl bin Hunaif returned from (the battle
     of) Siffin, we went to ask him (as to why he had
     come back). He replied, "(You should not
     consider me a coward) but blame your opinions.
     I saw myself on the day of Abu Jandal (inclined
     to fight), and if I had the power of refusing the
     order of Allah's Apostle then, I would have
     refused it (and fought the infidels bravely). Allah
     and His Apostle know (what is convenient)
     better. Whenever we put our swords on our
     shoulders for any matter that terrified us, our
     swords led us to an easy agreeable solution
     before the present situation (of disagreement and
     dispute between the Muslims). When we mend
     the breach in one side, it opened in another, and
     we do not know what to do about it." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 503: 

     Narrated Kab bin Ujra: 

     The Prophet came to me at the time of
     Al-Hudaibiya Pledge while lice were falling on
     my face. He said, "Are the lice of your head
     troubling you?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Shave
     your head and fast for three days, or feed six
     poor persons, or slaughter a sheep as sacrifice."
     (The sub-narrator, Aiyub said, "I do not know
     with which of these three options he started.") 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 504: 

     Narrated Ka'b bin Ujra: 

     We were in the company of Allah's Apostle at
     Al-Hudaibiya in the state of Ihram and the
     pagans did not allow us to proceed (to the
     Ka'ba). I had thick hair and lice started falling on
     my face. The Prophet passed by me and said,
     "Are the lice of your head troubling you?" I
     replied, Yes." (The sub-narrator added, "Then
     the following Divine Verse was revealed:-- "And
     if anyone of you is ill or has an ailment in his
     scalp, (necessitating shaving) must pay a ransom
     (Fida) of either fasting or feeding the poor, Or
     offering a sacrifice." (2.196) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 505: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Some people of the tribe of 'Ukl and 'Uraina
     arrived at Medina to meet the Prophet and
     embraced Islam and said, "O Allah's Prophet!
     We are the owners of milch livestock (i.e.
     bedouins) and not farmers (i.e. countrymen)."
     They found the climate of Medina unsuitable for
     them. So Allah's Apostle ordered that they
     should be provided with some milch camels and
     a shepherd and ordered them to go out of
     Medina and to drink the camels' milk and urine
     (as medicine) So they set out and when they
     reached Al-Harra, they reverted to Heathenism
     after embracing Islam, and killed the shepherd of
     the Prophet and drove away the camels. When
     this news reached the Prophet, he sent some
     people in pursuit of them. (So they were caught
     and brought back to the Prophet ). The Prophet
     gave his orders in their concern. So their eyes
     were branded with pieces of iron and their hands
     and legs were cut off and they were left away in
     Harra till they died in that state of theirs. (See
     Hadith 234 Vol 1) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 506: 

     Narrated Abu Raja: 

     The freed slave of Abu Qilaba, who was with
     Abu Qilaba in Sham: 'Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz
     consulted the people saying, "What do you think
     of Qasama." They said, "'It is a right (judgment)
     which Allah's Apostle and the Caliphs before you
     acted on." Abu Qilaba was behind 'Umar's bed.
     'Anbasa bin Said said, But what about the
     narration concerning the people of Uraina?" Abu
     Qilaba said, "Anas bin Malik narrated it to me,"
     and then narrated the whole story. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 507: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     Once I went (from Medina) towards (Al-Ghaba)
     before the first Adhan of the Fajr Prayer. The
     she-camels of Allah's Apostle used to graze at a
     place called Dhi-Qarad. A slave of
     'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf met me (on the way)
     and said, "The she-camels of Allah's Apostle had
     been taken away by force." I asked, "Who had
     taken them?" He replied "(The people of)
     Ghatafan." I made three loud cries (to the people
     of Medina) saying, "O Sabahah!" I made the
     people between the two mountains of Medina
     hear me. Then I rushed onward and caught up
     with the robbers while they were watering the
     camels. I started throwing arrows at them as I
     was a good archer and I was saying, "I am the
     son of Al-Akwa', and today will perish the
     wicked people." I kept on saying like that till I
     restored the she-camels (of the Prophet), I also
     snatched thirty Burda (i.e. garments) from them.
     Then the Prophet and the other people came
     there, and I said, "O Allah's Prophet! I have
     stopped the people (of Ghatafan) from taking
     water and they are thirsty now. So send (some
     people) after them now." On that the Prophet
     said, "O the son of Al-Akwa'! You have
     over-powered them, so forgive them." Then we
     all came back and Allah's Apostle seated me
     behind him on his she-camel till we entered
     Medina. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 508: 

     Narrated Suwaid bin An-Numan: 

     I went out in the company of the Prophet in the
     year of Khaibar, and when we reached As
     Sahba' which is the lower part of Khaibar, the
     Prophet offered the Asr prayer and then asked
     the people to collect the journey food. Nothing
     was brought but Sawiq which the Prophet
     ordered to be moistened with water, and then he
     ate it and we also ate it. Then he got up to offer
     the Maghrib prayer. He washed his mouth, and
     we too washed our mouths, and then he offered
     the prayer without repeating his abulution. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 509: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     We went out to Khaibar in the company of the
     Prophet. While we were proceeding at night, a
     man from the group said to 'Amir, "O 'Amir!
     Won't you let us hear your poetry?" 'Amir was a
     poet, so he got down and started reciting for the
     people poetry that kept pace with the camels'
     footsteps, saying:-- "O Allah! Without You we
     Would not have been guided On the right path
     Neither would be have given In charity, nor
     would We have prayed. So please forgive us,
     what we have committed (i.e. our defects); let all
     of us Be sacrificed for Your Cause And send
     Sakina (i.e. calmness) Upon us to make our feet
     firm When we meet our enemy, and If they will
     call us towards An unjust thing, We will refuse.
     The infidels have made a hue and Cry to ask
     others' help Against us." The Prophet on that,
     asked, "Who is that (camel) driver (reciting
     poetry)?" The people said, "He is 'Amir bin
     Al-Akwa'." 

     Then the Prophet said, "May Allah bestow His
     Mercy on him." A man amongst the people said,
     "O Allah's Prophet! has (martyrdom) been
     granted to him. Would that you let us enjoy his
     company longer." Then we reached and besieged
     Khaibar till we were afflicted with severe hunger.
     Then Allah helped the Muslims conquer it (i.e.
     Khaibar). In the evening of the day of the
     conquest of the city, the Muslims made huge
     fires. The Prophet said, "What are these fires?
     For cooking what, are you making the fire?" The
     people replied, "(For cooking) meat." He asked,
     "What kind of meat?" They (i.e. people) said,
     "The meat of donkeys." The Prophet said,
     "Throw away the meat and break the pots!"
     Some man said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we
     throw away the meat and wash the pots
     instead?" He said, "(Yes, you can do) that too."
     So when the army files were arranged in rows
     (for the clash), 'Amir's sword was short and he
     aimed at the leg of a Jew to strike it, but the
     sharp blade of the sword returned to him and
     injured his own knee, and that caused him to die.
     When they returned from the battle, Allah's
     Apostle saw me (in a sad mood). He took my
     hand and said, "What is bothering you?" I
     replied, "Let my father and mother be sacrificed
     for you! The people say that the deeds of 'Amir
     are lost." The Prophet said, "Whoever says so, is
     mistaken, for 'Amir has got a double reward."
     The Prophet raised two fingers and added, "He
     (i.e. Amir) was a persevering struggler in the
     Cause of Allah and there are few 'Arabs who
     achieved the like of (good deeds) 'Amir had
     done." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 510: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle reached Khaibar at night and it
     was his habit that, whenever he reached the
     enemy at night, he will not attack them till it was
     morning. When it was morning, the Jews came
     out with their spades and baskets, and when they
     saw him(i.e. the Prophet ), they said,
     "Muhammad! By Allah! Muhammad and his
     army!" The Prophet said, "Khaibar is destroyed,
     for whenever we approach a (hostile) nation (to
     fight), then evil will be the morning for those who
     have been warned." 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: We reached Khaibar
     early in the morning and the inhabitants of
     Khaibar came out carrying their spades, and
     when they saw the Prophet they said,
     "Muhammad! By Allah! Muhammad and his
     army!" The Prophet said, "Allahu-Akbar!
     Khaibar is destroyed, for whenever we approach
     a (hostile) nation (to fight) then evil will be the
     morning for those who have been warned." We
     then got the meat of donkeys (and intended to
     eat it), but an announcement was made by the
     announcer of the Prophet, "Allah and His
     Apostle forbid you to eat the meat of donkeys as
     it is an impure thing." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 511: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Someone came to Allah's Apostles and said,
     "The donkeys have been eaten (by the
     Muslims)." The Prophet kept quiet. Then the man
     came again and said, "The donkeys have been
     eaten." The Prophet kept quiet. The man came to
     him the third time and said, "The donkeys have
     been consumed." On that the Prophet ordered an
     announcer to announce to the people, "Allah and
     His Apostle forbid you to eat the meat of
     donkeys." Then the cooking pots were upset
     while the meat was still boiling in them. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 512: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet offered the Fajr Prayer near
     Khaibar when it was still dark and then said,
     "Allahu-Akbar! Khaibar is destroyed, for
     whenever we approach a (hostile) nation (to
     fight), then evil will be the morning for those who
     have been warned." Then the inhabitants of
     Khaibar came out running on the roads. The
     Prophet had their warriors killed, their offspring
     and woman taken as captives. Safiya was
     amongst the captives, She first came in the share
     of Dahya Alkali but later on she belonged to the
     Prophet . The Prophet made her manumission as
     her 'Mahr'. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 513: 

     Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz bin Suhaib: 

     Anas bin Malik said, "The Prophet took Safiya
     as a captive. He manumitted her and married
     her." Thabit asked Anas, "What did he give her
     as Mahr (i.e. marriage gift)?" Anas replied. "Her
     Mahr was herself, for he manumitted her." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 514: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad As Saidi: 

     Allah's Apostle (and his army) encountered the
     pagans and the two armies.,, fought and then
     Allah's Apostle returned to his army camps and
     the others (i.e. the enemy) returned to their army
     camps. Amongst the companions of the Prophet
     there was a man who could not help pursuing any
     single isolated pagan to strike him with his sword.
     Somebody said, "None has benefited the
     Muslims today more than so-and-so." On that
     Allah's Apostle said, "He is from the people of
     the Hell-Fire certainly." A man amongst the
     people (i.e. Muslims) said, "I will accompany him
     (to know the fact)." So he went along with him,
     and whenever he stopped he stopped with him,
     and whenever he hastened, he hastened with him.
     The (brave) man then got wounded severely, and
     seeking to die at once, he planted his sword into
     the ground and put its point against his chest in
     between his breasts, and then threw himself on it
     and committed suicide. On that the person (who
     was accompanying the deceased all the time)
     came to Allah's Apostle and said, "I testify that
     you are the Apostle of Allah." The Prophet said,
     "Why is that (what makes you say so)?" He said
     "It is concerning the man whom you have already
     mentioned as one of the dwellers of the
     Hell-Fire. The people were surprised by your
     statement, and I said to them, "I will try to find
     out the truth about him for you." So I went out
     after him and he was then inflicted with a severe
     wound and because of that, he hurried to bring
     death upon himself by planting the handle of his
     sword into the ground and directing its tip
     towards his chest between his breasts, and then
     he threw himself over it and committed suicide."
     Allah's Apostle then said, "A man may do what
     seem to the people as the deeds of the dwellers
     of Paradise but he is from the dwellers of the
     Hell-Fire and another may do what seem to the
     people as the deeds of the dwellers of the
     Hell-Fire, but he is from the dwellers of
     Paradise." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 515: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     We witnessed (the battle of) Khaibar. Allah's
     Apostle said about one of those who were with
     him and who claimed to be a Muslim. "This
     (man) is from the dwellers of the Hell-Fire."
     When the battle started, that fellow fought so
     violently and bravely that he received plenty of
     wounds. Some of the people were about to
     doubt (the Prophet's statement), but the man,
     feeling the pain of his wounds, put his hand into
     his quiver and took out of it, some arrows with
     which he slaughtered himself (i.e. committed
     suicide). Then some men amongst the Muslims
     came hurriedly and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     Allah has made your statement true so-and-so
     has committed suicide. "The Prophet said, "O
     so-and-so! Get up and make an announcement
     that none but a believer will enter Paradise and
     that Allah may support the religion with an
     unchaste (evil) wicked man. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 516: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari: 

     When Allah's Apostle fought the battle of
     Khaibar, or when Allah's Apostle went towards
     it, (whenever) the people, (passed over a high
     place overlooking a valley, they raised their
     voices saying, "Allahu-Akbar! Allahu-Akbar!
     None has the right to be worshipped except
     Allah." On that Allah's Apostle said (to them),
     "Lower your voices, for you are not calling a
     deaf or an absent one, but you are calling a
     Hearer Who is near and is with you." I was
     behind the riding animal of Allah's Apostle and he
     heard me saying. "There Is neither might, nor
     power but with Allah," On that he said to me, "O
     Abdullah bin Qais!" I said, "Labbaik. O Allah's
     Apostle!" He said, "Shall I tell you a sentence
     which is one of the treasures of Paradise" I said,
     "Yes, O Allah's Apostle! Let my father and
     mother be sacrificed for your sake." He said, "It
     is: There is neither might nor power but with
     Allah." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 517: 

     Narrated Yazid bin Abi Ubaid: 

     I saw the trace of a wound in Salama's leg. I said
     to him, "O Abu Muslim! What is this wound?"
     He said, "This was inflicted on me on the day of
     Khaibar and the people said, 'Salama has been
     wounded.' Then I went to the Prophet and he
     puffed his saliva in it (i.e. the wound) thrice., and
     since then I have not had any pain in it till this
     hour." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 518: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     During one of his Ghazawat, the Prophet
     encountered the pagans, and the two armies
     fought, and then each of them returned to their
     army camps. Amongst the (army of the) Muslims
     there was a man who would follow every pagan
     separated from the army and strike him with his
     sword. It was said, "O Allah's Apostle! None
     has fought so satisfactorily as so-and-so (namely,
     that brave Muslim). "The Prophet said, "He is
     from the dwellers of the Hell-Fire." The people
     said, "Who amongst us will be of the dwellers of
     Paradise if this (man) is from the dwellers of the
     Hell-Fire?" Then a man from amongst the people
     said, "I will follow him and accompany him in his
     fast and slow movements." The (brave) man got
     wounded, and wanting to die at once, he put the
     handle of his sword on the ground and its tip in
     between his breasts, and then threw himself over
     it, committing suicide. Then the man (who had
     watched the deceased) returned to the Prophet
     and said, "I testify that you are Apostle of Allah."
     The Prophet said, "What is this?" The man told
     him the whole story. The Prophet said, "A man
     may do what may seem to the people as the
     deeds of the dwellers of Paradise, but he is of the
     dwellers of the Hell-Fire and a man may do what
     may seem to the people as the deeds of the
     dwellers of the Hell-Fire, but he is from the
     dwellers of Paradise." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 519: 

     Narrated Abu Imran: 

     Anas looked at the people wearing Tailsans (i.e.
     a special kind of head covering worn by Jews in
     old days). On that Anas said, "At this moment
     they (i.e. those people) look like the Jews of
     Khaibar." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 520: 

     Narrated Salama: 

     Ali remained behind the Prophet during the
     Ghazwa of Khaibar as he was suffering from eye
     trouble. He then said, "(How can) I remain
     behind the Prophet ," and followed him. So when
     he slept on the night of the conquest of Khaibar,
     the Prophet said, "I will give the flag tomorrow,
     or tomorrow the flag will be taken by a man who
     is loved by Allah and His Apostle , and
     (Khaibar) will be conquered through him, (with
     Allah's help)" While every one of us was hopeful
     to have the flag, it was said, "Here is 'Ali" and the
     Prophet gave him the flag and Khaibar was
     conquered through him (with Allah's Help). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 521: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     On the day of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle said,
     "Tomorrow I will give this flag to a man through
     whose hands Allah will give us victory. He loves
     Allah and His Apostle, and he is loved by Allah
     and His Apostle." The people remained that
     night, wondering as to who would be given it. In
     the morning the people went to Allah's Apostle
     and everyone of them was hopeful to receive it
     (i.e. the flag). The Prophet said, "Where is Ali bin
     Abi Talib?" It was said, "He is suffering from eye
     trouble O Allah's Apostle." He said, "Send for
     him." 'Ali was brought and Allah's Apostle spat in
     his eye and invoked good upon him. So 'Ali was
     cured as if he never had any trouble. Then the
     Prophet gave him the flag. 'Ali said "O Allah's
     Apostle! I will fight with them till they become
     like us." Allah's Apostle said, "Proceed and do
     not hurry. When you enter their territory, call
     them to embrace Islam and inform them of
     Allah's Rights which they should observe, for by
     Allah, even if a single man is led on the right path
     (of Islam) by Allah through you, then that will be
     better for you than the nice red camels. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 522: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     We arrived at Khaibar, and when Allah helped
     His Apostle to open the fort, the beauty of Safiya
     bint Huyai bin Akhtaq whose husband had been
     killed while she was a bride, was mentioned to
     Allah's Apostle. The Prophet selected her for
     himself, and set out with her, and when we
     reached a place called Sidd-as-Sahba,' Safiya
     became clean from her menses then Allah's
     Apostle married her. Hais (i.e. an 'Arabian dish)
     was prepared on a small leather mat. Then the
     Prophet said to me, "I invite the people around
     you." So that was the marriage banquet of the
     Prophet and Safiya. Then we proceeded
     towards Medina, and I saw the Prophet, making
     for her a kind of cushion with his cloak behind
     him (on his camel). He then sat beside his camel
     and put his knee for Safiya to put her foot on, in
     order to ride (on the camel). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 523: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet stayed with Safiya bint Huyai for
     three days on the way of Khaibar where he
     consummated his marriage with her. Safiya was
     amongst those who were ordered to use a veil. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 524: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet stayed for three rights between
     Khaibar and Medina and was married to Safiya.
     I invited the Muslim to h s marriage banquet and
     there wa neither meat nor bread in that banquet
     but the Prophet ordered Bilal to spread the
     leather mats on which dates, dried yogurt and
     butter were put. The Muslims said amongst
     themselves, "Will she (i.e. Safiya) be one of the
     mothers of the believers, (i.e. one of the wives of
     the Prophet ) or just (a lady captive) of what his
     right-hand possesses" Some of them said, "If the
     Prophet makes her observe the veil, then she will
     be one of the mothers of the believers (i.e. one of
     the Prophet's wives), and if he does not make
     her observe the veil, then she will be his lady
     slave." So when he departed, he made a place
     for her behind him (on his and made her observe
     the veil. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 525: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal: 

     While we were besieging Khaibar, a person
     threw a leather container containing some fat and
     I ran to take it. Suddenly I looked behind, and
     behold! The Prophet was there. So I felt shy (to
     take it then). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 526: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     On the day of Khaiber, Allah's Apostle forbade
     the eating of garlic and the meat of donkeys. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 527: 

     Narrated 'Ali bin Abi Talib: 

     On the day of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle forbade
     the Mut'a (i.e. temporary marriage) and the
     eating of donkey-meat. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 528: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     On the day of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle forbade
     the eating of donkey meat. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 529: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the eating of
     donkey-meat. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 530: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     On the day of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle forbade
     the eating of donkey meat and allowed the eating
     of horse meat. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 531: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa: 

     We where afflicted with severe hunger on the
     day of Khaibar. While the cooking pots were
     boiling and some of the food was well-cooked,
     the announcer of the Prophet came to say, "Do
     not eat anything the donkey-meat and upset the
     cooking pots." We then thought that the Prophet
     had prohibited such food because the Khumus
     had not been taken out of it. Some others said,
     "He prohibited the meat of donkeys from the
     point of view of principle, because donkeys used
     to eat dirty things." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 532: 

     Narrated Al-Bara and 'Abdullah bin Abl Aufa: 

     That when they were in the company of the
     Prophet, they got some donkeys which they
     (slaughtered and) cooked. Then the announcer of
     the Prophet said, "Turn the cooking pots upside
     down (i.e. throw out the meat)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 533: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' and Ibn Abi Aufa: 

     On the day of Khaibar when the cooking pots
     were put on the fire, the Prophet said, "Turn the
     cooking pots upside down." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 534: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     We took part in a Ghazwa with the Prophet
     (same as Hadith No. 533). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 535: 

     Narrated Al-Bara Bin Azib: 

     During the Ghazwa of Khaibar, the Prophet
     ordered us to throw away the meat of the
     donkeys whether it was still raw or cooked. He
     did not allow us to eat it later on. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 536: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     I do not know whether the Prophet forbade the
     eating of donkey-meat (temporarily) because
     they were the beasts of burden for the people,
     and he disliked that their means of transportation
     should be lost, or he forbade it on the day of
     Khaibar permanently. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 537: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     On the day of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle divided
     (the war booty of Khaibar) with the ratio of two
     shares for the horse and one-share for the foot
     soldier. (The sub-narrator, Nafi' explained this,
     saying, "If a man had a horse, he was given three
     shares and if he had no horse, then he was given
     one share.") 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 538: 

     Narrated Jubair bin Mutim: 

     Uthman bin 'Affan and I went to the Prophet and
     said, "You had given Banu Al-Muttalib from the
     Khumus of Khaibar's booty and left us in spite of
     the fact that we and Banu Al-Muttalib are
     similarly related to you." The Prophet said, "Banu
     Hashim and Banu Al-Muttalib only are one and
     the same." So the Prophet did not give anything
     to Banu Abd Shams and Banu Nawfal. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 539: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The news of the migration of the Prophet (from
     Mecca to Medina) reached us while we were in
     Yemen. So we set out as emigrants towards him.
     We were (three) I and my two brothers. I was
     the youngest of them, and one of the two was
     Abu Burda, and the other, Abu Ruhm, and our
     total number was either 53 or 52 men from my
     people. We got on board a boat and our boat
     took us to Negus in Ethiopia. There we met
     Ja'far bin Abi Talib and stayed with him. Then
     we all came (to Medina) and met the Prophet at
     the time of the conquest of Khaibar. Some of the
     people used to say to us, namely the people of
     the ship, "We have migrated before you." Asma'
     bint 'Umais who was one of those who had come
     with us, came as a visitor to Hafsa, the wife the
     Prophet . She had migrated along with those
     other Muslims who migrated to Negus. 'Umar
     came to Hafsa while Asma' bint 'Umais was with
     her. 'Umar, on seeing Asma,' said, "Who is this?"
     She said, "Asma' bint 'Umais," 'Umar said, "Is
     she the Ethiopian? Is she the sea-faring lady?"
     Asma' replied, "Yes." 'Umar said, "We have
     migrated before you (people of the boat), so we
     have got more right than you over Allah's
     Apostle " On that Asma' became angry and said,
     "No, by Allah, while you were with Allah's
     Apostle who was feeding the hungry ones
     amongst you, and advised the ignorant ones
     amongst you, we were in the far-off hated land of
     Ethiopia, and all that was for the sake of Allah's
     Apostle . By Allah, I will neither eat any food nor
     drink anything till I inform Allah's Apostle of all
     that you have said. There we were harmed and
     frightened. I will mention this to the Prophet and
     will not tell a lie or curtail your saying or add
     something to it." So when the Prophet came, she
     said, "O Allah's Prophet 'Umar has said
     so-and-so." He said (to Asma'), "What did you
     say to him?" Asma's aid, "I told him so-and-so."
     The Prophet said, "He (i.e. 'Umar) has not got
     more right than you people over me, as he and
     his companions have (the reward of) only one
     migration, and you, the people of the boat, have
     (the reward of) two migrations." Asma' later on
     said, "I saw Abu Musa and the other people of
     the boat coming to me in successive groups,
     asking me about this narration,, and to them
     nothing in the world was more cheerful and
     greater than what the Prophet had said about
     them." 

     Narrated Abu Burda: Asma' said, "I saw Abu
     Musa requesting me to repeat this narration again
     and again." 

     Narrated Abu Burda: Abu Musa said, "The
     Prophet said, "I recognize the voice of the group
     of Al-Ashariyun, when they recite the Qur'an,
     when they enter their homes at night, and I
     recognize their houses by (listening) to their
     voices when they are reciting the Qur'an at night
     although I have not seen their houses when they
     came to them during the day time. Amongst them
     is Hakim who, on meeting the cavalry or the
     enemy, used to say to them (i.e. the enemy). My
     companions order you to wait for them.' " 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 540: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     We came upon the Prophet after he had
     conquered Khaibar. He then gave us a share
     (from the booty), but apart from us he did not
     give to anybody else who did not attend the
     Conquest. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 541: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     When we conquered Khaibar, we gained neither
     gold nor silver as booty, but we gained cows,
     camels, goods and gardens. Then we departed
     with Allah's Apostle to the valley of Al-Qira, and
     at that time Allah's Apostle had a slave called
     Mid'am who had been presented to him by one
     of Banu Ad-Dibbab. While the slave was
     dismounting the saddle of Allah's Apostle an
     arrow the thrower of which was unknown, came
     and hit him. The people said, "Congratulations to
     him for the martyrdom." Allah's Apostle said,
     "No, by Him in Whose Hand my soul is, the
     sheet (of cloth) which he had taken (illegally) on
     the day of Khaibar from the booty before the
     distribution of the booty, has become a flame of
     Fire burning him." On hearing that, a man brought
     one or two leather straps of shoes to the Prophet
     and said, "These are things I took (illegally)." On
     that Allah's Apostle said, "This is a strap, or
     these are two straps of Fire." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 542: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     By Him in Whose Hand my soul is, were I not
     afraid that the other Muslims might be left in
     poverty, I would divide (the land of) whatever
     village I may conquer (among the fighters), as the
     Prophet divided the land of Khaibar. But I prefer
     to leave it as a (source of) a common treasury for
     them to distribute it revenue amongst themselves.


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 543: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     But for the other Muslims (i.e. coming
     generations) I would divide (the land of)
     whatever villages the Muslims might conquer
     (among the fighters), as the Prophet divided (the
     land of) Khaibar. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 544: 

     Narrated 'Anbasa bin Said: 

     Abu Huraira came to the Prophet and asked him
     (for a share from the Khaibar booty). On that,
     one of the sons of Said bin Al-'As said to him,
     "O Allah's Apostle! Do not give him." Abu
     Huraira then said (to the Prophet ) "This is the
     murderer of Ibn Qauqal." Sa'id's son said, "How
     strange! A guinea pig coming from Qadum
     Ad-Dan!" 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle sent
     Aban from Medina to Najd as the commander of
     a Sariya. Aban and his companions came to the
     Prophet at Khaibar after the Prophet had
     conquered it, and the reins of their horses were
     made of the fire of date palm trees. I said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Do not give them a share of the
     booty." on, that, Aban said (to me), "Strange!
     You suggest such a thing though you are what
     you are, O guinea pig coming down from the top
     of Ad-Dal (a lotus tree)! "On that the Prophet
     said, "O Aban, sit down ! " and did not give them
     any share. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 545: 

     Narrated Said: 

     Aban bin Said came to the Prophet and greeted
     him. Abu Huraira said, "O Allah's Apostle! This
     (Aban) is the murderer of the Ibn Qauqal." (On
     hearing that), Aban said to Abu Huraira, "How
     strange your saying is! You, a guinea pig,
     descending from Qadum Dan, blaming me for
     (killing) a person whom Allah favored (with
     martyrdom) with my hand, and whom He
     forbade to degrade me with his hand.' 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 546: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Fatima the daughter of the Prophet sent someone
     to Abu Bakr (when he was a caliph), asking for
     her inheritance of what Allah's Apostle had left of
     the property bestowed on him by Allah from the
     Fai (i.e. booty gained without fighting) in Medina,
     and Fadak, and what remained of the Khumus of
     the Khaibar booty. On that, Abu Bakr said,
     "Allah's Apostle said, "Our property is not
     inherited. Whatever we leave, is Sadaqa, but the
     family of (the Prophet) Muhammad can eat of
     this property.' By Allah, I will not make any
     change in the state of the Sadaqa of Allah's
     Apostle and will leave it as it was during the
     lifetime of Allah's Apostle, and will dispose of it
     as Allah's Apostle used to do." So Abu Bakr
     refused to give anything of that to Fatima. So she
     became angry with Abu Bakr and kept away
     from him, and did not task to him till she died.
     She remained alive for six months after the death
     of the Prophet. When she died, her husband 'Ali,
     buried her at night without informing Abu Bakr
     and he said the funeral prayer by himself. When
     Fatima was alive, the people used to respect 'Ali
     much, but after her death, 'Ali noticed a change
     in the people's attitude towards him. So Ali
     sought reconciliation with Abu Bakr and gave
     him an oath of allegiance. 'Ali had not given the
     oath of allegiance during those months (i.e. the
     period between the Prophet's death and Fatima's
     death). 'Ali sent someone to Abu Bakr saying,
     "Come to us, but let nobody come with you," as
     he disliked that 'Umar should come, 'Umar said
     (to Abu Bakr), "No, by Allah, you shall not enter
     upon them alone " Abu Bakr said, "What do you
     think they will do to me? By Allah, I will go to
     them' So Abu Bakr entered upon them, and then
     'Ali uttered Tashah-hud and said (to Abu Bakr),
     "We know well your superiority and what Allah
     has given you, and we are not jealous of the
     good what Allah has bestowed upon you, but
     you did not consult us in the question of the rule
     and we thought that we have got a right in it
     because of our near relationship to Allah's
     Apostle ." 

     Thereupon Abu Bakr's eyes flowed with tears.
     And when Abu Bakr spoke, he said, "By Him in
     Whose Hand my soul is to keep good relations
     with the relatives of Allah's Apostle is dearer to
     me than to keep good relations with my own
     relatives. But as for the trouble which arose
     between me and you about his property, I will do
     my best to spend it according to what is good,
     and will not leave any rule or regulation which I
     saw Allah's Apostle following, in disposing of it,
     but I will follow." On that 'Ali said to Abu Bakr,
     "I promise to give you the oath of allegiance in
     this after noon." So when Abu Bakr had offered
     the Zuhr prayer, he ascended the pulpit and
     uttered the Tashah-hud and then mentioned the
     story of 'Ali and his failure to give the oath of
     allegiance, and excused him, accepting what
     excuses he had offered; Then 'Ali (got up) and
     praying (to Allah) for forgiveness, he uttered
     Tashah-hud, praised Abu Bakr's right, and said,
     that he had not done what he had done because
     of jealousy of Abu Bakr or as a protest of that
     Allah had favored him with. 'Ali added, "But we
     used to consider that we too had some right in
     this affair (of rulership) and that he (i.e. Abu
     Bakr) did not consult us in this matter, and
     therefore caused us to feel sorry." On that all the
     Muslims became happy and said, "You have
     done the right thing." The Muslims then became
     friendly with 'Ali as he returned to what the
     people had done (i.e. giving the oath of allegiance
     to Abu Bakr). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 547: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When Khaibar was conquered, we said, "Now
     we will eat our fill of dates!" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 548: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     We did not eat our fill except after we had
     conquered Khaibar. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 549: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri and Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle appointed a man as the ruler of
     Khaibar who later brought some Janib (i.e. dates
     of good quality) to the Prophet. On that, Allah's
     Apostle said (to him). "Are all the dates of
     Khaibar like this?" He said, "No, by Allah, O
     Allah's Apostle! But we take one Sa of these
     (dates of good quality) for two or three Sa's of
     other dates (of inferior quality)." On that, Allah's
     Apostle said, "Do not do so, but first sell the
     inferior quality dates for money and then with that
     money, buy Janib." Abu Said and Abu Huraira
     said, "The Prophet made the brother of Bani Adi
     from the Ansar as the ruler of Khaibar. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 550: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet gave (the land of) Khaibar to the
     Jews (of Khaibar) on condition that they would
     work on it and cultivate it and they would have
     half of its yield. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 551: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     When Khaibar was conquered, a (cooked)
     sheep containing poison, was given as a present
     to Allah's Apostle 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 552: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle appointed Usama bin Zaid as the
     commander of some people. Those people
     criticized his leadership. The Prophet said, "If
     you speak ill of his leadership, you have already
     spoken ill of his father's leadership before. By
     Allah, he deserved to be a Commander, and he
     was one of the most beloved persons to me and
     now this (i.e. Usama) is one of the most beloved
     persons to me after him. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 553: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     When the Prophet went out for the 'Umra in the
     month of Dhal-Qa'da, the people of Mecca did
     not allow him to enter Mecca till he agreed to
     conclude a peace treaty with them by virtue of
     which he would stay in Mecca for three days
     only (in the following year). When the agreement
     was being written, the Muslims wrote: "This is the
     peace treaty, which Muhammad, Apostle of
     Allah has concluded." 

     The infidels said (to the Prophet), "We do not
     agree with you on this, for if we knew that you
     are Apostle of Allah we would not have
     prevented you for anything (i.e. entering Mecca,
     etc.), but you are Muhammad, the son of
     'Abdullah." Then he said to 'Ali, "Erase (the name
     of) 'Apostle of Allah'." 'Ali said, "No, by Allah, I
     will never erase you (i.e. your name)." Then
     Allah's Apostle took the writing sheet...and he
     did not know a better writing..and he wrote or
     got it the following written! "This is the peace
     treaty which Muhammad, the son of 'Abdullah,
     has concluded: "Muhammad should not bring
     arms into Mecca except sheathed swords, and
     should not take with him any person of the
     people of Mecca even if such a person wanted
     to follow him, and if any of his companions wants
     to stay in Mecca, he should not forbid him." 

     (In the next year) when the Prophet entered
     Mecca and the allowed period of stay elapsed,
     the infidels came to Ali and said "Tell your
     companion (Muhammad) to go out, as the
     allowed period of his stay has finished." So the
     Prophet departed (from Mecca) and the
     daughter of Hamza followed him shouting "O
     Uncle, O Uncle!" Ali took her by the hand and
     said to Fatima, "Take the daughter of your
     uncle." So she made her ride (on her horse).
     (When they reached Medina) 'Ali, Zaid and
     Ja'far quarreled about her. 'Ali said, "I took her
     for she is the daughter of my uncle." Ja'far said,
     "She is the daughter of my uncle and her aunt is
     my wife." Zaid said, "She is the daughter of my
     brother." On that, the Prophet gave her to her
     aunt and said, "The aunt is of the same status as
     the mother." He then said to 'Ali, "You are from
     me, and I am from you," and said to Ja'far, "You
     resemble me in appearance and character," and
     said to Zaid, "You are our brother and our freed
     slave." 'Ali said to the Prophet 'Won't you marry
     the daughter of Hamza?" The Prophet said, "She
     is the daughter of my foster brother." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 554: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle set out with the intention of
     performing 'Umra, but the infidels of Quraish
     intervened between him and the Ka'ba, so the
     Prophet slaughtered his Hadi (i.e. sacrificing
     animals and shaved his head at Al-Hudaibiya and
     concluded a peace treaty with them (i.e. the
     infidels) on condition that he would perform the
     'Umra the next year and that he would not carry
     arms against them except swords, and would not
     stay (in Mecca) more than what they would
     allow. So the Prophet performed the 'Umra in
     the following year and according to the peace
     treaty, he entered Mecca, and when he had
     stayed there for three days, the infidels ordered
     him to leave, and he left. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 555: 

     Narrated Mujahid: 

     'Urwa and I entered the Mosque and found
     'Abdullah bin 'Umar sitting beside the dwelling
     place of 'Aisha. 'Urwa asked (Ibn 'Umar), "How
     many 'Umras did the Prophet perform?" Ibn
     'Umar replied, "Four, one of which was in
     Rajab." Then we heard 'Aisha brushing her teeth
     whereupon 'Urwa said, "O mother of the
     believers! Don't you hear what Abu
     'Abdur-Rahman is saying? He is saying that the
     Prophet performed four 'Umra, one of which
     was in Rajab." 'Aisha said, "The Prophet did not
     perform any 'Umra but he (i.e. Ibn 'Umar)
     witnessed it. And he (the Prophet ) never did any
     'Umra in (the month of) Rajab." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 556: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa: 

     When Allah's Apostle performed the 'Umra
     (which he performed in the year following the
     treaty of Al-Hudaibiya) we were screening
     Allah's Apostle from the infidels and their boys
     lest they should harm him. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 557: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When Allah's Apostle and his companions
     arrived (at Mecca), the pagans said, "There have
     come to you a group of people who have been
     weakened by the fever of Yathrib (i.e. Medina)."
     So the Prophet ordered his companions to do
     Ramal (i.e. fast walking) in the first three rounds
     of Tawaf around the Ka'ba and to walk in
     between the two corners (i.e. the black stone
     and the Yemenite corner). The only cause which
     prevented the Prophet from ordering them to do
     Ramal in all the rounds of Tawaf, was that he
     pitied them. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 558: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet hastened in going around the Ka'ba
     and between the Safa and Marwa in order to
     show the pagans his strength. Ibn 'Abbas added,
     "When the Prophet arrived (at Mecca) in the
     year of peace (following that of Al-Hudaibiya
     treaty with the pagans of Mecca), he (ordered
     his companions) to do Ramal in order to show
     their strength to the pagans and the pagans were
     watching (the Muslims) from (the hill of)
     Quaiqan. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 559: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet married Maimuna while he was in
     the state of lhram but he consummated that
     marriage after finishing that state. Maimuna died
     at Saraf (i.e. a place near Mecca). Ibn 'Abbas
     added, The Prophet married Maimuna during the
     'Umrat-al-Qada' (i.e. the 'Umra performed in lieu
     of the 'Umra which the Prophet could not
     perform because the pagans, prevented him to
     perform that 'Umra) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 560: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar informed me that on the day (of
     Mu'tah) he stood beside Ja'far who was dead
     (i.e. killed in the battle), and he counted fifty
     wounds in his body, caused by stabs or strokes,
     and none of those wounds was in his back. 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle
     appointed Zaid bin Haritha as the commander of
     the army during the Ghazwa of Mu'tah and said,
     "If Zaid is martyred, Ja'far should take over his
     position, and if Ja'far is martyred, 'Abdullah bin
     Rawaha should take over his position.' "
     'Abdulla-h bin 'Umar further said, "I was present
     amongst them in that battle and we searched for
     Ja'far bin Abi Talib and found his body amongst
     the bodies of the martyred ones, and found over
     ninety wounds over his body, caused by stabs or
     shots (of arrows). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 561: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet had informed the people of the
     martyrdom of Zaid, Ja'far and Ibn Rawaha
     before the news of their death reached. The
     Prophet said, "Zaid took the flag (as the
     commander of the army) and was martyred, then
     Ja'far took it and was martyred, and then Ibn
     Rawaha took it and was martyred." At that time
     the Prophet's eyes were shedding tears. He
     added, "Then the flag was taken by a Sword
     amongst the Swords of Allah (i.e. Khalid) and
     Allah made them (i.e. the Muslims) victorious." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 562: 

     Narrated 'Amra: 

     I heard 'Aisha saying, "When the news of the
     martyrdom of Ibn Haritha, Ja'far bin Abi Talib
     and 'Abdullah bin Rawaka reached, Allah's
     Apostle sat with sorrow explicit on his face."
     'Aisha added, "I was then peeping through a
     chink in the door. A man came to him and said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! The women of Ja'far are
     crying.' Thereupon the Prophet told him to forbid
     them to do so. So the man went away and
     returned saying, "I forbade them but they did not
     listen to me." The Prophet ordered him again to
     go (and forbid them). He went again and came
     saying, 'By Allah, they overpowered me (i.e. did
     not listen to me)." 'Aisha said that Allah's Apostle
     said (to him), "Go and throw dust into their
     mouths." Aisha added, "I said, May Allah put
     your nose in the dust! By Allah, neither have you
     done what you have been ordered, nor have you
     relieved Allah's Apostle from trouble." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 563: 

     Narrated 'Amir: 

     Whenever Ibn 'Umar greeted the son of Ja'far,
     he used to say (to him), "Assalam 'Alaika (i.e.
     peace be on you) O the son of two-winged
     person." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 564: 

     Narrated Khalid bin Al-Walid: 

     On the day (of the battle of) Mu'tah, nine swords
     were broken in my hand, and nothing was left in
     my hand except a Yemenite sword of mine. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 565: 

     Narrated Khalid bin Al-Walid: 

     On the day of Mu'tah, nine swords were broken
     in my hand and only a Yemenite sword of mine
     remained in my hand. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 566: 

     Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir: 

     Abdullah bin Rawaha fell down unconscious and
     his sister 'Amra started crying and was saying
     loudly, "O Jabala! Oh so-and-so! Oh so-and-so!
     and went on calling him by his (good ) qualities
     one by one). When he came to his senses, he
     said (to his sister), "When-ever you said
     something, I was asked, 'Are you really so (i.e.
     as she says)?" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 567: 

     Narrated Ash Shabi: 

     An Nu'man bin Bashir said, "Abdullah bin
     Rawaha fell down unconscious.." (and mentioned
     the above Hadith adding, "Thereupon, when he
     died she (i.e. his sister) did not weep over him." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 568: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     Allah's Apostle sent us towards Al-Huruqa, and
     in the morning we attacked them and defeated
     them. I and an Ansari man followed a man from
     among them and when we took him over, he
     said, "La ilaha illal-Lah." On hearing that, the
     Ansari man stopped, but I killed him by stabbing
     him with my spear. When we returned, the
     Prophet came to know about that and he said,
     "O Usama! Did you kill him after he had said "La
     ilaha ilal-Lah?" I said, "But he said so only to
     save himself." The Prophet kept on repeating that
     so often that I wished I had not embraced Islam
     before that day. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 569: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     I fought in seven Ghazwat (i.e. battles) along with
     the Prophet and fought in nine battles, fought by
     armies dispatched by the Prophet. Once Abu
     Bakr was our commander and at another time,
     Usama was our commander. 

     Narrated Salama in another narration: I fought
     seven Ghazwat (i.e. battles) along with the
     Prophet and also fought in nine battles, fought by
     armies sent by the Prophet . Once Abu Bakr
     was our commander and another time, Usama
     was (our commander). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 570: 

     Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa: 

     I fought in nine Ghazwa-t along with the Prophet,
     I also fought along with Ibn Haritha when the
     Prophet made him our commander. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 571: 

     Narrated Yazid bin Abi Ubaid: 

     Salama bin Al-Akwa' said, "I fought in seven
     Ghazwat along with the Prophet." He then
     mentioned Khaibar, Al-Hudaibiya, the day (i.e.
     battle) of Hunain and the day of Al-Qurad. I
     forgot the names of the other Ghazwat. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 572: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     Allah's Apostle sent me, Az-Zubair and
     Al-Miqdad saying, "Proceed till you reach
     Rawdat Khakh where there is a lady carrying a
     letter, and take that (letter) from her." So we
     proceeded on our way with our horses galloping
     till we reached the Rawda, and there we found
     the lady and said to her, "Take out the letter."
     She said, "I have no letter." We said, "Take out
     the letter, or else we will take off your clothes."
     So she took it out of her braid, and we brought
     the letter to Allah's Apostle . The letter was
     addressed from Hatib, bin Abi Balta'a to some
     pagans of Mecca, telling them about what Allah's
     Apostle intended to do. Allah's Apostle said, "O
     Hatib! What is this?" Hatib replied, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Do not make a hasty decision about
     me. I was a person not belonging to Quraish but
     I was an ally to them from outside and had no
     blood relation with them, and all the Emigrants
     who were with you, have got their kinsmen (in
     Mecca) who can protect their families and
     properties. So I liked to do them a favor so that
     they might protect my relatives as I have no
     blood relation with them. I did not do this to
     renegade from my religion (i.e. Islam) nor did I
     do it to choose Heathenism after Islam." Allah's
     Apostle said to his companions." As regards him,
     he (i.e. Hatib) has told you the truth." 'Umar said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! Allow me to chop off the
     head of this hypocrite!" The Prophet said, "He
     (i.e. Hatib) has witnessed the Badr battle (i.e.
     fought in it) and what could tell you, perhaps
     Allah looked at those who witnessed Badr and
     said, "O the people of Badr (i.e. Badr Muslim
     warriors), do what you like, for I have forgiven
     you. "Then Allah revealed the Sura:-- 

     "O you who believe! Take not my enemies And
     your enemies as friends offering them (Your) love
     even though they have disbelieved in that Truth
     (i.e. Allah, Prophet Muhammad and this Quran)
     which has come to you ....(to the end of
     Verse)....(And whosoever of you (Muslims)
     does that, then indeed he has gone (far) astray
     (away) from the Straight Path." (60.1 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 573: 

     Narrated Ubaidullah bin Abdullah bin 'Utba: 

     Ibn Abbas said, Allah's Apostle fought the
     Ghazwa (i.e. battles of Al-Fath during
     Ramadan." 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: Ibn Al-Musaiyab (also) said
     the same. Ibn Abbas added, "The Prophet fasted
     and when he reached Al-Kadid, a place where
     there is water between Kudaid and 'Usfan, he
     broke his fast and did not fast afterwards till the
     whole month had passed away. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 574: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas : 

     The Prophet left Medina (for Mecca) in the
     company of ten-thousand (Muslim warriors) in
     (the month of) Ramadan, and that was eight and
     a half years after his migration to Medina. He and
     the Muslims who were with him, proceeded on
     their way to Mecca. He was fasting and they
     were fasting, but when they reached a place
     called Al-Kadid which was a place of water
     between 'Usfan and Kudaid, he broke his fast
     and so did they. (Az-Zuhri said, "One should
     take the last action of Allah's Apostle and leave
     his early action (while taking a verdict.") 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 575: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle set out towards Hunain in the
     month of Ramadan and some of the people were
     fasting while some others were not fasting, and
     when the Prophet mounted his she-camel, he
     asked for a tumbler of milk or water and put it on
     the palm of his hand or on his she-camel and then
     the people looked at him; and those who were
     not fasting told those who were fasting, to break
     their fast (i.e. as the Prophet had done so). Ibn
     Abbas added, "The Prophet went (to Hunain) in
     the year of the Conquest (of Mecca)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 576: 

     Narrated Tawus: 

     Ibn Abbas said, "Allah's Apostle travelled in the
     month of Ramadan and he fasted till he reached
     (a place called) 'Usfan, then he asked for a
     tumbler of water and drank it by the daytime so
     that the people might see him. He broke his fast
     till he reached Mecca." Ibn Abbas used to say,
     "Allah's Apostle fasted and sometimes did not
     fast while traveling, so one may fast or may not
     (on journeys)" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 577: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     When Allah's Apostle set out (towards Mecca)
     during the year of the Conquest (of Mecca) and
     this news reached (the infidels of Quraish), Abu
     Sufyan, Hakim bin Hizam and Budail bin Warqa
     came out to gather information about Allah's
     Apostle , They proceeded on their way till they
     reached a place called Marr-az-Zahran (which is
     near Mecca). Behold! There they saw many fires
     as if they were the fires of Arafat. Abu Sufyan
     said, "What is this? It looked like the fires of
     Arafat." Budail bin Warqa' said, "Banu 'Amr are
     less in number than that." Some of the guards of
     Allah's Apostle saw them and took them over,
     caught them and brought them to Allah's Apostle.
     Abu Sufyan embraced Islam. 

     When the Prophet proceeded, he said to
     Al-Abbas, "Keep Abu Sufyan standing at the top
     of the mountain so that he would look at the
     Muslims. So Al-'Abbas kept him standing (at
     that place) and the tribes with the Prophet started
     passing in front of Abu Sufyan in military batches.
     A batch passed and Abu Sufyan said, "O 'Abbas
     Who are these?" 'Abbas said, "They are (Banu)
     Ghifar." Abu Sufyan said, I have got nothing to
     do with Ghifar." Then (a batch of the tribe of)
     Juhaina passed by and he said similarly as above.
     Then (a batch of the tribe of) Sad bin Huzaim
     passed by and he said similarly as above. then
     (Banu) Sulaim passed by and he said similarly as
     above. Then came a batch, the like of which Abu
     Sufyan had not seen. He said, "Who are these?"
     Abbas said, "They are the Ansar headed by Sad
     bin Ubada, the one holding the flag." Sad bin
     Ubada said, "O Abu Sufyan! Today is the day of
     a great battle and today (what is prohibited in)
     the Ka'ba will be permissible." Abu Sufyan said.,
     "O 'Abbas! How excellent the day of destruction
     is! "Then came another batch (of warriors) which
     was the smallest of all the batches, and in it there
     was Allah's Apostle and his companions and the
     flag of the Prophet was carried by Az-Zubair bin
     Al Awwam. When Allah's Apostle passed by
     Abu Sufyan, the latter said, (to the Prophet), "Do
     you know what Sad bin 'Ubada said?" The
     Prophet said, "What did he say?" Abu Sufyan
     said, "He said so-and-so." The Prophet said,
     "Sad told a lie, but today Allah will give
     superiority to the Ka'ba and today the Ka'ba will
     be covered with a (cloth) covering." Allah's
     Apostle ordered that his flag be fixed at
     Al-Hajun. 

     Narrated 'Urwa: Nafi bin Jubair bin Mut'im said,
     "I heard Al-Abbas saying to Az-Zubair bin
     Al-'Awwam, 'O Abu 'Abdullah ! Did Allah's
     Apostle order you to fix the flag here?' " Allah's
     Apostle ordered Khalid bin Al-Walid to enter
     Mecca from its upper part from Ka'da while the
     Prophet himself entered from Kuda. Two men
     from the cavalry of Khalid bin Al-Wahd named
     Hubaish bin Al-Ash'ar and Kurz bin Jabir
     Al-Fihri were martyred on that day. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 578: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle on the day of the Conquest
     of Mecca over his she-camel, reciting
     Surat-al-Fath in a vibrant quivering tone. (The
     sub-narrator, Mu'awiya added, "Were I not
     afraid that the people may gather around me, I
     would recite in vibrant quivering tone as he (i.e.
     'Abdullah bin Mughaffal) did, imitating Allah's
     Apostle.") 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 579: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin 'Uthman: 

     Usama bin Zaid said during the Conquest (of
     Mecca), "O Allah's Apostle! Where will we
     encamp tomorrow?" The Prophet said, "But has
     'Aqil left for us any house to lodge in?" He then
     added, "No believer will inherit an infidel's
     property, and no infidel will inherit the property
     of a believer." Az-Zuhri was asked, "Who
     inherited Abu Talib?" Az-Zuhri replied, "Ail and
     Talib inherited him." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 580: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If Allah makes us
     victorious, our encamping place will be Al-Khaif,
     the place where the infidels took an oath to be
     loyal to Heathenism (by boycotting Banu
     Hashim, the Prophet's folk)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 581: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     When Allah's Apostle intended to carry on the
     Ghazwa of Hunain, he said, "Tomorrow, if Allah
     wished, our encamping) plaice will be Khaif Bani
     Kinana where (the infidels) took an oath to be
     loyal to Heathenism." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 582: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     On the day of the Conquest, the Prophet entered
     Mecca, wearing a helmet on his head. When he
     took it off, a man came and said, "Ibn Khatal is
     clinging to the curtain of the Ka'ba." The Prophet
     said, "Kill him." (Malik a sub-narrator said, "On
     that day the Prophet was not in a state of Ihram
     as it appeared to us, and Allah knows better.") 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 583: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     When the Prophet entered Mecca on the day of
     the Conquest, there were 360 idols around the
     Ka'ba. The Prophet started striking them with a
     stick he had in his hand and was saying, "Truth
     has come and Falsehood will neither start nor will
     it reappear. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 584: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When Allah's Apostle arrived in Mecca, he
     refused to enter the Ka'ba while there were idols
     in it. So he ordered that they be taken out. The
     pictures of the (Prophets) Abraham and Ishmael,
     holding arrows of divination in their hands, were
     carried out. The Prophet said, "May Allah ruin
     them (i.e. the infidels) for they knew very well
     that they (i.e. Abraham and Ishmael) never drew
     lots by these (divination arrows). Then the
     Prophet entered the Ka'ba and said. "Allahu
     Akbar" in all its directions and came out and not
     offer any prayer therein. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 585: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     During the year of the Conquest (of Mecca), the
     Prophet entered Mecca through Kada which
     was at the upper part of Mecca. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 586: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     During the year of the Conquest (of Mecca), the
     Prophet entered Mecca through its upper part
     through Kada. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 587: 

     Narrated Ibn Laila: 

     None informed us that he saw the Prophet
     offering the Duha (i.e. forenoon) prayer, except
     Um Ham who mentioned that the Prophet took a
     bath in her house on the day of the Conquest (of
     Mecca) and then offered an eight Rakat prayer.
     She added, "I never saw the Prophet offering a
     lighter prayer than that prayer, but he was
     performing perfect bowing and prostrations." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 588: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas : 

     'Umar used to admit me (into his house) along
     with the old men who had fought in the Badr
     battle. Some of them said (to 'Umar), "Why do
     you allow this young man to enter with us, while
     we have sons of his own age? " 'Umar said, "You
     know what person he is." One day 'Umar called
     them and called me along with them, I had
     thought he called me on that day to show them
     something about me (i.e. my knowledge). 'Umar
     asked them, "What do you say about (the Sura):
     "When comes the help of Allah and the Conquest
     (of Mecca) And you see mankind entering the
     Religion of Allah (i.e. Islam) in crowds. 'So
     celebrate the Praises Of your Lord and ask for
     His forgiveness, Truly, He is the One Who
     accepts repentance and forgives." (110.1-3) 

     Some of them replied, "We are ordered to praise
     Allah and repent to Him if we are helped and
     granted victory." Some said, "We do not know."
     Others kept quiet. 'Umar then said to me, "Do
     you say similarly?" I said, "No." 'Umar said
     "What do you say then?" I said, "This Verse
     indicates the approaching of the death of Allah's
     Apostle of which Allah informed him. When
     comes the help of Allah and the Conquest, i.e.
     the Conquest of Mecca, that will be the sign of
     your Prophet's) approaching death, so testify the
     uniqueness of your Lord (i.e. Allah) and praise
     Him and repent to Him as He is ready to
     forgive." On that, 'Umar said, "I do not know
     about it anything other than what you know." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 589: 

     Narrated Abu Shuraih: 

     Al-Adawi that he said to 'Amr bin Said while the
     latter was sending troops in batches to Mecca,
     "O chief! Allow me to tell you a statement which
     Allah's Apostle said on the second day of the
     Conquest of Mecca. My two ears heard it and
     my heart remembered it and my two eyes saw
     him when he said it. He (i.e. the Prophet) praised
     Allah and then said, 'Mecca has been made a
     sanctuary by Allah and not by the people, so it is
     not lawful for a person, who believes in Allah and
     the Last Day to shed blood in it, or to cut its
     trees and if someone asks the permission to fight
     in Mecca because Allah's Apostle was allowed
     to fight in it, say to him; Allah permitted His
     Apostle and did not allow you, and even he (i.e.
     the Apostle) was allowed for a short period of
     the day, and today its (Mecca's sanctity has
     become the same as it was before (of old) so
     those who are present should inform those who
     are absent (this Hadith)." Then Abu Shuraih, was
     asked, "What did 'Amr say to you? Abu Shuraih
     said, "He said, "I knew that better than you, O
     Abu Shuraih! The Haram (i.e. Mecca) does not
     give refuge to a sinner or a fleeing murderer or a
     person running away after causing destruction." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 590: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     That he heard Allah's Apostle saying in the year
     of the Conquest (of Mecca) while he was in
     Mecca, "Allah and His Apostle have made the
     selling of wine (i.e. alcoholic drinks) unlawful." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 591: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     We stayed (in Mecca) for ten days along with
     the Prophet and used to offer shortened prayers
     (i.e. journey prayers). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 592: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet stayed in Mecca for 19 days during
     which he prayed 2 Rakat in each prayer. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 593: 

     Narrated 'Ikrima: 

     Ibn 'Abbas said, "We stayed for 19 days with
     Prophet on a journey during which we used to
     offer shortened prayers." Ibn 'Abbas added,
     "We offer the Qasr prayer (i.e. shortened prayer)
     If we stay up to 19 days as travelers, But if we
     stay longer, we offer complete prayers 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 594: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: 

     While we were in the company of the Ibn
     Al-Musaiyab, Sunain Abi Jamila informed us (a
     Hadith), Abu Jamila said that he lived during the
     lifetime of the Prophet and that he had
     accompanied him ( to Mecca) during the year of
     the Conquest (of Mecca). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 595: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Salama: 

     We were at a place which was a thoroughfare
     for the people, and the caravans used to pass by
     us and we would ask them, "What is wrong with
     the people? What is wrong with the people?
     Who is that man?. They would say, "That man
     claims that Allah has sent him (as an Apostle),
     that he has been divinely inspired, that Allah has
     revealed to him such-and-such." I used to
     memorize that (Divine) Talk, and feel as if it was
     inculcated in my chest (i.e. mind) And the 'Arabs
     (other than Quraish) delayed their conversion to
     Islam till the Conquest (of Mecca). They used to
     say." "Leave him (i.e. Muhammad) and his
     people Quraish: if he overpowers them then he is
     a true Prophet. So, when Mecca was
     conquered, then every tribe rushed to embrace
     Islam, and my father hurried to embrace Islam
     before (the other members of) my tribe. When
     my father returned (from the Prophet) to his
     tribe, he said, "By Allah, I have come to you
     from the Prophet for sure!" The Prophet
     afterwards said to them, 'Offer such-and-such
     prayer at such-and-such time, and when the time
     for the prayer becomes due, then one of you
     should pronounce the Adhan (for the prayer),
     and let the one amongst you who knows Qur'an
     most should, lead the prayer." So they looked for
     such a person and found none who knew more
     Qur'an than I because of the Quranic material
     which I used to learn from the caravans. They
     therefore made me their Imam ((to lead the
     prayer) and at that time I was a boy of six or
     seven years, wearing a Burda (i.e. a black square
     garment) proved to be very short for me (and my
     body became partly naked). A lady from the
     tribe said, "Won't you cover the anus of your
     reciter for us?" So they bought (a piece of cloth)
     and made a shirt for me. I had never been so
     happy with anything before as I was with that
     shirt. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 596: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Utba bin Abi Waqqas authorized his brother Sad
     to take the son of the slave-girl of Zam'a into his
     custody. 'Utba said (to him). "He is my son."
     When Allah's Apostle arrived in Mecca during
     the Conquest (of Mecca), Sad bin Abi Waqqas
     took the son of the slave-girl of Zam'a and took
     him to the Prophet 'Abd bin Zam'a too came
     along with him. Sad said. "This is the son of my
     brother and the latter has informed me that he is
     his son." 'Abd bin Zam'a said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! This is my brother who is the son of the
     slave-girl of Zam'a and was born on his (i.e.
     Zam'as) bed.' Allah's Apostle looked at the son
     of the slave-girl of Zam'a and noticed that he, of
     all the people had the greatest resemblance to
     'Utba bin Abi Waqqas. Allah's Apostle then said
     (to 'Abd), " He is yours; he is your brother, O
     'Abd bin Zam'a, he was born on the bed (of your
     father)." (At the same time) Allah's Apostle said
     (to his wife Sauda), "Veil yourself before him (i.e.
     the son of the slave-girl) O Sauda," because of
     the resemblance he noticed between him and
     Utba bin Abi Waqqas. Allah's Apostle added,
     "The boy is for the bed (i.e. for the owner of the
     bed where he was born), and stone is for the
     adulterer." (Ibn Shihab said, "Abu Huraira used
     to say that (i.e. the last statement of the Prophet
     in the above Hadith 596, publicly.") 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 597: 

     Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 

     A lady committed theft during the lifetime of
     Allah's Apostle in the Ghazwa of Al-Fath, ((i.e.
     Conquest of Mecca). Her folk went to Usama
     bin Zaid to intercede for her (with the Prophet).
     When Usama interceded for her with Allah's
     Apostle, the color of the face of Allah's Apostle
     changed and he said, "Do you intercede with me
     in a matter involving one of the legal punishments
     prescribed by Allah?" Usama said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Ask Allah's Forgiveness for me." So in
     the afternoon, Allah's Apostle got up and
     addressed the people. He praised Allah as He
     deserved and then said, "Amma ba'du ! The
     nations prior to you were destroyed because if a
     noble amongst them stole, they used to excuse
     him, and if a poor person amongst them stole,
     they would apply (Allah's) Legal Punishment to
     him. By Him in Whose Hand Muhammad's soul
     is, if Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad stole, I
     would cut her hand." Then Allah's Apostle gave
     his order in the case of that woman and her hand
     was cut off. Afterwards her repentance proved
     sincere and she got married. 'Aisha said, "That
     lady used to visit me and I used to convey her
     demands to Allah's Apostle 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 598: 

     Narrated Majashi: 

     I took my brother to the Prophet after the
     Conquest (of Mecca) and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I have come to you with my brother so
     that you may take a pledge of allegiance from
     him for migration." The Prophet said, The people
     of migration (i.e. those who migrated to Medina
     before the Conquest) enjoyed the privileges of
     migration (i.e. there is no need for migration
     anymore)." I said to the Prophet, "For what will
     you take his pledge of allegiance?" The Prophet
     said, "I will take his pledge of allegiance for
     Islam, Belief, and for Jihad (i.e. fighting in Allah's
     Cause)" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 599: 

     Narrated Mujashi bin Masud: 

     I took Abu Mabad to the Prophet in order that
     he might give him the pledge of allegiance for
     migration. The Prophet said, "Migration has gone
     to its people, but I take the pledge from him (i.e.
     Abu Mabad) for Islam and Jihad." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 600: 

     Narrated Mujahid: 

     I said to Ibn 'Umar, "I want to migrate to Sham."
     He said, "There is no migration, but Jihad (for
     Allah's Cause). Go and offer yourself for Jihad,
     and if you find an opportunity for Jihad (stay
     there) otherwise, come back." (In an other
     narration) Ibn 'Umar said, "There is no migration
     today or after Allah's Apostle." (and completed
     his statement as above.) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 601: 

     Narrated Mujahid bin Jabr: 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to say, "There is no
     migration after the Conquest (of Mecca)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 602: 

     Narrated 'Ata' bin Abi Rabah: 

     'Ubaid bin 'Umar and I visited 'Aisha, and he
     asked her about the migration. She said, "There
     is no migration today. A believer used to flee
     with his religion to Allah and His Prophet for fear
     that he might be put to trial as regards his
     religion. Today Allah has rendered Islam
     victorious; therefore a believing one can worship
     one's Lord wherever one wishes. But there is
     Jihad (for Allah's Cause) and intentions." (See
     Hadith 42, in the 4th Vol. for its Explanation) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 603: 

     Narrated Mujahid: 

     Allah's Apostle got up on the day of the
     Conquest of Mecca and said, "Allah has made
     Mecca a sanctuary since the day He created the
     Heavens and the Earth, and it will remain a
     sanctuary by virtue of the sanctity Allah has
     bestowed on it till the Day of Resurrection. It
     (i.e. fighting in it) was not made lawful to anyone
     before me!, nor will it be made lawful to anyone
     after me, and it was not made lawful for me
     except for a short period of time. Its game should
     not be chased, nor should its trees be cut, nor its
     vegetation or grass uprooted, not its Luqata (i.e.
     Most things) picked up except by one who
     makes a public announcement about it."
     Al-Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib said, "Except the
     Idhkhir, O Allah's Apostle, as it is indispensable
     for blacksmiths and houses." On that, the
     Prophet kept quiet and then said, "Except the
     Idhkhir as it is lawful to cut." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 604: 

     Narrated Ismail: 

     I saw (a healed scar of) blow over the hand of
     Ibn Abi Aufa who said, "I received that blow in
     the battle of Hunain in the company of the
     Prophet." I said, "Did you take part in the battle
     of Hunain?" He replied, "Yes (and in other
     battles) before it." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 605: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     I heard Al-Bara' narrating when a man came and
     said to him, "O Abu 'Umara! Did you flee on the
     day (of the battle) of Hunain?" Al-Bara' replied,
     "I testify that the Prophet did not flee, but the
     hasty people hurried away and the people of
     Hawazin threw arrows at them. At that time, Abu
     Sufyan bin Al-Harith was holding the white mule
     of the Prophet by the head, and the Prophet was
     saying, "I am the Prophet undoubtedly: I am the
     son of 'Abdul-Muttalib." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 606: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     Al-Bara' was asked while I was listening, "Did
     you flee (before the enemy) along with the
     Prophet on the day of (the battle of) Hunain?" He
     replied, "As for the Prophet, he did not (flee).
     The enemy were good archers and the Prophet
     was saying, "I am the Prophet undoubtedly; I am
     the son of 'Abdul Muttalib." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 607: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     That he heard Al-Bara narrating when a man
     from Qais (tribe) asked him "Did you flee leaving
     Allah's Apostle on the day (of the battle) of
     Hunain?" Al-Bara' replied, "But Allah's Apostle
     did not flee. The people of Hawazin were good
     archers, and when we attacked them, they fled.
     But rushing towards the booty, we were
     confronted by the arrows (of the enemy). I saw
     the Prophet riding his white mule while Abu
     Sufyan was holding its reins, and the Prophet
     was saying "I am the Prophet undoubtedly."
     (Israil and Zuhair said, "The Prophet dismounted
     from his Mule.") 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 608: 

     Narrated Marwan and Al-Miswar bin
     Makhrama: 

     When the delegate of Hawazin came to Allah's
     Apostle declaring their conversion to Islam and
     asked him to return their properties and captives,
     Allah's Apostle got up and said to them, "There
     Is involved in this matter, the people whom you
     see with me, and the most beloved talk to me, is
     the true one. So choose one of two alternatives:
     Either the captives or the properties. I have been
     waiting for you (i.e. have not distributed the
     booty)." Allah's Apostle had delayed the
     distribution of their booty over ten nights after his
     return from Ta'if. So when they came to know
     that Allah's Apostle was not going to return to
     them but one of the two, they said, "We prefer to
     have our captives." So Allah's Apostle got up
     amongst the Muslims, and praising Allah as He
     deserved, said, "To proceed! Your brothers
     have come to you with repentance and I see (it
     logical) to return their captives. So, whoever of
     you likes to do that as a favor then he can do it.
     And whoever of you likes to stick to his share till
     we give him from the very first booty which Allah
     will give us, then he can do so." The people said,
     "We do that (i.e. return the captives) willingly as
     a favor, 'O Allah's Apostle!" Allah's Apostle
     said, "We do not know which of you have
     agreed to it and which have not; so go back and
     let your chiefs forward us your decision." They
     went back and their chief's spoke to them, and
     they (i.e. the chiefs) returned to Allah's Apostle
     and informed him that all of them had agreed (to
     give up their captives) with pleasure, and had
     given their permission (i.e. that the captives be
     returned to their people). (The sub-narrator said,
     "That is what has reached me about the captives
     of Hawazin tribe.") 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 609: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     When we returned from (the battle of) Hunain,
     'Umar asked the Prophet about a vow which he
     had made during the Pre-lslamic period of
     Ignorance that he would perform Itikaf. The
     Prophet ordered him to fulfill his vow. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 610: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     We set out along with the Prophet during the
     year of (the battle of) Hunain, and when we
     faced the enemy, the Muslims (with the exception
     of the Prophet and some of his companions)
     retreated (before the enemy). I saw one of the
     pagans over-powering one of the Muslims, so I
     struck the pagan from behind his neck causing his
     armor to be cut off. The pagan headed towards
     me and pressed me so forcibly that I felt as if I
     was dying. Then death took him over and he
     released me. Afterwards I followed 'Umar and
     said to him, "What is wrong with the people?" He
     said, "It is the Order of Allah." Then the Muslims
     returned (to the battle after the flight) and (after
     overcoming the enemy) the Prophet sat and said,
     "Whoever had killed an Infidel and has an
     evidence to this issue, will have the Salb (i.e. the
     belonging of the deceased e.g. clothes, arms,
     horse, etc)." I (stood up) and said, "Who will be
     my witness?" and then sat down. Then the
     Prophet repeated his question. Then the Prophet
     said the same (for the third time). I got up and
     said, "Who will be my witness?" and then sat
     down. The Prophet asked his former question
     again. So I got up. The Prophet said, What is the
     matter, O Abu Qatada?" So I narrated the whole
     story; A man said, "Abu Qatada has spoken the
     truth, and the Salb of the deceased is with me, so
     please compensate Abu Qatada on my behalf."
     Abu Bakr said, "No! By Allah, it will never
     happen that the Prophet will leave a Lion of Allah
     who fights for the Sake of Allah and His Apostle
     and give his spoils to you." The Prophet said,
     "Abu Bakr has spoken the truth. Give it (the
     spoils) back to him (O man)!" So he gave it to
     me and I bought a garden in (the land of) Banu
     Salama with it (i.e. the spoils) and that was the
     first property I got after embracing Islam. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 611: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     When it was the day of (the battle of) Hunain, I
     saw a Muslim man fighting with one of the
     pagans and another pagan was hiding himself
     behind the Muslim in order to kill him. So I
     hurried towards the pagan who was hiding
     behind the Muslim to kill him, and he raised his
     hand to hit me but I hit his hand and cut it off.
     That man got hold of me and pressed me so hard
     that I was afraid (that I would die), then he knelt
     down and his grip became loose and I pushed
     him and killed him. The Muslims (excepting the
     Prophet and some of his companions) started
     fleeing and I too, fled with them. Suddenly I met
     'Umar bin Al-Khattab amongst the people and I
     asked him, "What is wrong with the people?" He
     said, "It is the order of Allah" Then the people
     returned to Allah's Apostle (after defeating the
     enemy). Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever
     produces a proof that he has killed an infidel, will
     have the spoils of the killed man." So I got up to
     look for an evidence to prove that I had killed an
     infidel, but I could not find anyone to bear
     witness for me, so I sat down. Then it came to
     my mind (that I should speak of it) and I
     mentioned the case to Allah's Apostle. A man
     from the persons who were sitting with him (i.e.
     the Prophet), said, "The arms of the deceased
     one whom he ( i.e. Abu Qatada) has mentioned,
     are with me, so please compensate him for it (i.e.
     the spoils)," Abu Bakr said, "No, Allah's Apostle
     will not give it (i.e. the spoils) to a weak humble
     person from Quraish and leave one of Allah's
     Lions who fights on behalf of Allah and His
     Apostle." Allah's Apostle then got up and gave
     that (spoils) to me, and I bought with it, a garden
     which was the first property I got after embracing
     Islam. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 612: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     When the Prophet had finished from the battle of
     Hunain, he sent Abu Amir at the head of an army
     to Autas He (i.e. Abu Amir) met Duraid bin As
     Summa and Duraid was killed and Allah
     defeated his companions. The Prophet sent me
     with Abu 'Amir. Abu Amir was shot at his knee
     with an arrow which a man from Jushm had shot
     and fixed into his knee. I went to him and said,
     "O Uncle! Who shot you?" He pointed me out
     (his killer) saying, "That is my killer who shot me
     (with an arrow)." So I headed towards him and
     overtook him, and when he saw me, he fled, and
     I followed him and started saying to him, "Won't
     you be ashamed? Won't you stop?" So that
     person stopped, and we exchanged two hits with
     the swords and I killed him. Then I said to Abu
     'Amir. "Allah has killed your killer." He said,
     "Take out this arrow" So I removed it, and water
     oozed out of the wound. He then said, "O son of
     my brother! Convey my compliments to the
     Prophet and request him to ask Allah's
     Forgiveness for me." Abu Amir made me his
     successor in commanding the people (i.e.
     troops). He survived for a short while and then
     died. (Later) I returned and entered upon the
     Prophet at his house, and found him lying in a
     bed made of stalks of date-palm leaves knitted
     with ropes, and on it there was bedding. The
     strings of the bed had their traces over his back
     and sides. Then I told the Prophet about our and
     Abu Amir's news and how he had said "Tell him
     to ask for Allah's Forgiveness for me." The
     Prophet asked for water, performed ablution and
     then raised hands, saying, "O Allah's Forgive
     'Ubaid, Abu Amir." At that time I saw the
     whiteness of the Prophet's armpits. The Prophet
     then said, "O Allah, make him (i.e. Abu Amir) on
     the Day of Resurrection, superior to many of
     Your human creatures." I said, "Will you ask
     Allah's Forgiveness for me?" (On that) the
     Prophet said, "O Allah, forgive the sins of
     'Abdullah bin Qais and admit him to a nice
     entrance (i.e. paradise) on the Day of
     Resurrection." Abu Burda said, "One of the
     prayers was for Abu 'Amir and the other was for
     Abu Musa (i.e. 'Abdullah bin Qais)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 613: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     The Prophet came to me while there was an
     effeminate man sitting with me, and I heard him
     (i.e. the effeminate man) saying to 'Abdullah bin
     Abi Umaiya, "O 'Abdullah! See if Allah should
     make you conquer Ta'if tomorrow, then take the
     daughter of Ghailan (in marriage) as (she is so
     beautiful and fat that) she shows four folds of
     flesh when facing you, and eight when she turns
     her back." The Prophet then said, "These
     (effeminate men) should never enter upon you (O
     women!)." Ibn Juraij said, "That effeminate man
     was called Hit." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 614: 

     Narrated Hisham: 

     The above narration and added extra, that at that
     time, the Prophet, was besieging Taif. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 615: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Amr: 

     When Allah's Apostle besieged Taif and could
     not conquer its people, he said, "We will return
     (to Medina) If Allah wills." That distressed the
     Companions (of the Prophet and they said, "Shall
     we go away without conquering it (i.e. the Fort
     of Taif)?" Once the Prophet said, "Let us return."
     Then the Prophet said (to them), "Fight
     tomorrow." They fought and (many of them) got
     wounded, whereupon the Prophet said, "We will
     return (to Medina) tomorrow if Allah wills." That
     delighted them, whereupon the Prophet smiled.
     The sub-narrator, Sufyan said once, "(The
     Prophet) smiled." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 616: 

     Narrated Abu Uthman: 

     I heard from Sad, the first man who has thrown
     an arrow in Allah's Cause, and from Abu Bakra
     who jumped over the wall of the Ta'if Fort along
     with a few persons and came to the Prophet.
     They both said, "We heard the Prophet saying, "
     If somebody claims to be the son of somebody
     other than his father knowingly, he will be denied
     Paradise (i.e. he will not enter Paradise).' " 

     Narrated Ma'mar from 'Asim from Abu Al'Aliya
     or Abu Uthman An-Nahdi who said. "I heard
     Sad and Abu Bakra narrating from the Prophet."
     'Asim said, "I said (to him), 'Very trustworthy
     persons have narrated to you.' He said, 'Yes,
     one of them was the first to throw an arrow in
     Allah's Cause and the other came to the Prophet
     in a group of thirty-three persons from Ta'if.' 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 617: 

     Narrated Abu Burda: 

     Abu Musa said, "I was with the Prophet when he
     was encamping at Al-Jarana (a place) between
     Mecca and Medina and Bilal was with him. A
     bedouin came to the Prophet and said, "Won't
     you fulfill what you have promised me?" The
     Prophet said, 'Rejoice (at what I will do for
     you).' The bedouin said, "(You have said to me)
     rejoice too often." Then the Prophet turned to me
     (i.e. Abu Musa) and Bilal in an angry mood and
     said, 'The bedouin has refused the good tidings,
     so you both accept them.' Bilal and I said, 'We
     accept them.' Then the Prophet asked for a
     drinking bowl containing water and washed his
     hands and face in it, and then took a mouthful of
     water and threw it therein saying (to us), "Drink
     (some of) it and pour (some) over your faces and
     chests and be happy at the good tidings." So they
     both took the drinking bowl and did as
     instructed. Um Salama called from behind a
     screen, "Keep something (of the water for your
     mother." So they left some of it for her. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 618: 

     Narrated Safwan bin Ya'la bin Umaiya: 

     Ya'la used to say, "I wish I could see Allah's
     Apostle at the time when he is being inspired
     divinely." Ya'la added "While the Prophet was at
     Al-Ja'rana, shaded with a cloth sheet (in the form
     of a tent) and there were staying with him, some
     of his companions under it, suddenly there came
     to him a bedouin wearing a cloak and perfumed
     extravagantly. He said, "O Allah's Apostle !
     What is your opinion regarding a man who
     assumes the state of Ihram for 'Umra wearing a
     cloak after applying perfume to his body?" 'Umar
     signalled with his hand to Ya'la to come (near).
     Ya'la came and put his head (underneath that
     cloth sheet) and saw the Prophet red-faced and
     when that state (of the Prophet ) was over, he
     said, "Where is he who as already asked me
     about the 'Umra?" The man was looked for and
     brought to the Prophet The Prophet said (to
     him), "As for the perfume you have applied to
     your body, wash it off your body) thrice, and
     take off your cloak, and then do in your 'Umra
     the rites you do in your Hajj." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 619: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid bin Asim: When
     Allah gave to His Apostle the war booty on the
     day of Hunain, he distributed that booty amongst
     those whose hearts have been (recently)
     reconciled (to Islam), but did not give anything to
     the Ansar. So they 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 620: 

     Narrated Anas Bin Malik: 

     hen." Anas added: But they did not remain
     patient. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 621: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When it was the day of the Conquest (of Mecca)
     Allah's Apostle distributed the war booty
     amongst the people of Quraish which caused the
     Ansar to become angry. So the Prophet said,
     "Won't you be pleased that the people take the
     worldly things and you take Allah's Apostle with
     you? "They said, "Yes." The Prophet said, "If the
     people took their way through a valley or
     mountain pass, I would take my way through the
     Ansar's valley or mountain pass." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 622: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When it was the day of (the battle of) Hunain, the
     Prophet confronted the tribe of Hawazin while
     there were ten-thousand (men) besides the
     Tulaqa' (i.e. those who had embraced Islam on
     the day of the Conquest of Mecca) with the
     Prophet. When they (i.e. Muslims) fled, the
     Prophet said, "O the group of Ansari" They
     replied, "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle and Sadaik!
     We are under your command." Then the Prophet
     got down (from his mule) and said, "I am Allah's
     Slave and His Apostle." Then the pagans were
     defeated. The Prophet distributed the war booty
     amongst the Tulaqa and Muhajirin (i.e.
     Emigrants) and did not give anything to the
     Ansar. So the Ansar spoke (i.e. were
     dissatisfied) and he called them and made them
     enter a leather tent and said, Won't you be
     pleased that the people take the sheep and
     camels, and you take Allah's Apostle along with
     you?" The Prophet added, "If the people took
     their way through a valley and the Ansar took
     their way through a mountain pass, then I would
     choose a mountain pass of the Ansar" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 623: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet gathered some people of Ansar and
     said, "The People of Quraish are still close to
     their Pre-lslamic period of ignorance and have
     suffered a lot, and I want to help them and attract
     their hearts (by giving them the war booty).
     Won't you be pleased that the people take the
     worldly things) and you take Allah's Apostle with
     you to your homes?" They said, "Yes, (i.e. we
     are pleased with this distribution)." The Prophet
     said, "'If the people took their way through a
     valley and the Ansar took their way through a
     mountain pass, then I would take the Ansar's
     valley or the Ansar's mountain pass." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 624: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     When the Prophet distribute the war booty of
     Hunain, a man from the Ansar said, "He (i.e. the
     Prophet), did not intend to please Allah in this
     distribution." So I came to the Prophet and
     informed him of that (statement) whereupon the
     color of his face changed and he said, "May
     Allah bestow His Mercy on Moses, for he was
     troubled with more than this, but he remained
     patient." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 625: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     When it was the day of Hunain, Prophet favored
     some people over some others (in the distribution
     of the booty). He gave Al-Aqra' one-hundred
     camels and gave Uyaina the same, and also gave
     other people (of Quraish). A man said, "Allah's
     Pleasure was not the aim, in this distribution." I
     said, "I will inform the Prophet (about your
     statement)." The Prophet said, "May Allah
     bestow Mercy on Moses, for he was troubled
     more this but he remained patient." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 626: 

     Narrated Anas Bin Malik: 

     When it was the day (of the battle) of Hunain, the
     tributes of Hawazin and Ghatafan and others,
     along with their animals and offspring (and wives)
     came to fight against the Prophet The Prophet
     had with him, ten thousand men and some of the
     Tulaqa. The companions fled, leaving the
     Prophet alone. The Prophet then made two calls
     which were clearly distinguished from each other.
     He turned right and said, "O the group of Ansar!"
     They said, "Labbaik, O Allah's Apostle! Rejoice,
     for we are with you!" Then he turned left and
     said, "O the group of Ansar!" They said,
     "Labbaik! O Allah's Apostle! Rejoice, for we are
     with you!" The Prophet at that time, was riding
     on a white mule; then he dismounted and said, "I
     am Allah's Slave and His Apostle." The infidels
     then were defeated, and on that day the Prophet
     gained a large amount of booty which he
     distributed amongst the Muhajirin and the Tulaqa
     and did not give anything to the Ansar. The
     Ansar said, "When there is a difficulty, we are
     called, but the booty is given to other than us."
     The news reached the Prophet and he gathered
     them in a leather tent and said, "What is this news
     reaching me from you, O the group of Ansar?"
     They kept silent, He added," O the group of
     Ansar! Won't you be happy that the people take
     the worldly things and you take Allah's Apostle
     to your homes reserving him for yourself?" They
     said, "Yes." Then the Prophet said, "If the people
     took their way through a valley, and the Ansar
     took their way through a mountain pass, surely, I
     would take the Ansar's mountain pass." Hisham
     said, "O Abu Hamza (i.e. Anas)! Did you
     witness that? " He replied, "And how could I be
     absent from him?" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 627: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet sent a Sariya towards Najd and I
     was in it, and our share from the booty amounted
     to twelve camels each, and we were given an
     additional camel each. So we returned with
     thirteen camels each. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 628: 

     Narrated Salim's father: 

     The Prophet sent Khalid bin Al-Walid to the
     tribe of Jadhima and Khalid invited them to Islam
     but they could not express themselves by saying,
     "Aslamna (i.e. we have embraced Islam)," but
     they started saying "Saba'na! Saba'na (i.e. we
     have come out of one religion to another)."
     Khalid kept on killing (some of) them and taking
     (some of) them as captives and gave every one
     of us his Captive. When there came the day then
     Khalid ordered that each man (i.e. Muslim
     soldier) should kill his captive, I said, "By Allah, I
     will not kill my captive, and none of my
     companions will kill his captive." When we
     reached the Prophet, we mentioned to him the
     whole story. On that, the Prophet raised both his
     hands and said twice, "O Allah! I am free from
     what Khalid has done." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 629: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     The Prophet sent a Sariya under the command of
     a man from the Ansar and ordered the soldiers to
     obey him. He (i.e. the commander) became
     angry and said "Didn't the Prophet order you to
     obey me!" They replied, "Yes." He said, "Collect
     fire-wood for me." So they collected it. He said,
     "Make a fire." When they made it, he said, "Enter
     it (i.e. the fire)." So they intended to do that and
     started holding each other and saying, "We run
     towards (i.e. take refuge with) the Prophet from
     the fire." They kept on saying that till the fire was
     extinguished and the anger of the commander
     abated. When that news reached the Prophet he
     said, "If they had entered it (i.e. the fire), they
     would not have come out of it till the Day of
     Resurrection. Obedience (to somebody) is
     required when he enjoins what is good." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 630: 

     Narrated Abu Burda: 

     Allah's Apostle sent Abu Musa and Muadh bin
     Jabal to Yemen. He sent each of them to
     administer a province as Yemen consisted of two
     provinces. The Prophet said (to them), "Facilitate
     things for the people and do not make things
     difficult for them (Be kind and lenient (both of
     you) with the people, and do not be hard on
     them) and give the people good tidings and do
     not repulse them. So each of them went to carry
     on his job. So when any one of them toured his
     province and happened to come near (the border
     of the province of) his companion, he would visit
     him and greet him. Once Mu'adh toured that part
     of his state which was near (the border of the
     province of) his companion Abu Musa. Mu'adh
     came riding his mule till he reached Abu Musa
     and saw him sitting, and the people had gathered
     around him. Behold! There was a man tied with
     his hands behind his neck. Mu'adh said to Abu
     Musa, "O 'Abdullah bin Qais! What is this?" Abu
     Musa replied. "This man has reverted to
     Heathenism after embracing Islam." Mu'adh said,
     "I will not dismount till he is killed." Abu Musa
     replied, "He has been brought for this purpose,
     so come down." Mu'adh said, "I will not
     dismount till he is killed." So Abu Musa ordered
     that he be killed, and he was killed. Then Mu'adh
     dismounted and said, "O Abdullah (bin Qais)!
     How do you recite the Qur'an ?" Abu Musa said,
     "I recite the Qur'an regularly at intervals and
     piecemeal. How do you recite it O Mu'adh?"
     Mu'adh said, "I sleep in the first part of the night
     and then get up after having slept for the time
     devoted for my sleep and then recite as much as
     Allah has written for me. So I seek Allah's
     Reward for both my sleep as well as my prayer
     (at night)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 631: 

     Narrated Abi Burda: 

     That Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari said that the Prophet
     had sent him to Yemen and he asked the Prophet
     about certain (alcoholic) drink which used to be
     prepared there The Prophet said, "What are
     they?" Abu Musa said, "Al-Bit' and Al-Mizr?"
     He said, "Al-Bit is an alcoholic drink made from
     honey; and Al-Mizr is an alcoholic drink made
     from barley." The Prophet said, "All intoxicants
     are prohibited." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 632: 

     Narrated Abu Burda: 

     That the Prophet sent his (i.e. Abu Burda's)
     grandfather, Abu Musa and Mu'adh to Yemen
     and said to both of them "Facilitate things for the
     people (Be kind and lenient) and do not make
     things difficult (for people), and give them good
     tidings, and do not repulse them and both of you
     should obey each other." Abu Musa said, "O
     Allah's Prophet! In our land there is an alcoholic
     drink (prepared) from barley called Al-Mizr, and
     another (prepared) from honey, called Al-Bit"'
     The Prophet said, "All intoxicants are
     prohibited." Then both of them proceeded and
     Mu'adh asked Abu Musa, "How do you recite
     the Quran?" Abu Musa replied, "I recite it while I
     am standing, sitting or riding my riding animals, at
     intervals and piecemeal." Muadh said, "But I
     sleep and then get up. I sleep and hope for
     Allah's Reward for my sleep as I seek His
     Reward for my night prayer." Then he (i.e.
     Muadh) pitched a tent and they started visiting
     each other. Once Muadh paid a visit to Abu
     Musa and saw a chained man. Muadh asked,
     "What is this?" Abu Musa said, "(He was) a Jew
     who embraced Islam and has now turned
     apostate." Muadh said, "I will surely chop off his
     neck!" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 633: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari: 

     Allah's Apostle sent me (as a governor) to the
     land of my people, and I came while Allah's
     Apostle was encamping at a place called
     Al-Abtah. The Prophet said, "Have you made
     the intention to perform the Hajj, O Abdullah bin
     Qais?" I replied, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle!" He
     said, "What did you say?" I replied, "I said,
     'Labbaik' and expressed the same intention as
     yours." He said, "Have you driven the Hadi along
     with you?" I replied, "No, I did not drive the
     Hadi." He said, "So perform the Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba and then the Sai, between Safa and
     Marwa and then finish the state of Ihram." So I
     did the same, and one of the women of (the tribe
     of) Banu-Qais combed my hair. We continued
     follow in that tradition till the caliphate of Umar. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 634: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle said to Muadh bin Jabal when he
     sent him to Yemen. "You will come to the people
     of Scripture, and when you reach them, invite
     them to testify that none has the right to be
     worshipped except Allah and that Muhammad is
     His Apostle. And if they obey you in that, then
     tell them that Allah has enjoined on them five
     prayers to be performed every day and night.
     And if they obey you in that, then tell them that
     Allah has enjoined on them Sadaqa (i.e. Rakat)
     to be taken from the rich amongst them and given
     to the poor amongst them. And if they obey you
     in that, then be cautious! Don't take their best
     properties (as Zakat) and be afraid of the curse
     of an oppressed person as there is no screen
     between his invocation and Allah. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 635: 

     Narrated Amr bin Maimuin: 

     When Mu'adh arrived at Yemen, he led them
     (i.e. the people of Yemen) in the Fajr prayer
     wherein he recited: 'Allah took Abraham as a
     Khalil.' A man amongst the people said, "(How)
     glad the mother of Abraham is!" (In another
     narration) 'Amr said, "The Prophet sent Mu'adh
     to Yemen and he (led the people) in the Fajr
     prayer and recited: 'Allah took Abraham as a
     Khalil. A man behind him said, "(How) glad the
     mother of Abraham is!" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 636: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     Allah's Apostle sent us to Yemen along with
     Khalid bin Al-Walid. Later on he sent Ali bin Abi
     Talib in his place. The Prophet said to 'Ali, "Give
     Khalid's companions the choice of either staying
     with you (in Yemen) or returning to Medina." I
     was one of those who stayed with him (i.e. Ali)
     and got several Awaq (of gold from the war
     booty. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 637: 

     Narrated Buraida: 

     The Prophet sent 'Ali to Khalid to bring the
     Khumus (of the booty) and I hated Ali, and 'Ali
     had taken a bath (after a sexual act with a
     slave-girl from the Khumus). I said to Khalid,
     "Don't you see this (i.e. Ali)?" When we reached
     the Prophet I mentioned that to him. He said, "O
     Buraida! Do you hate Ali?" I said, "Yes." He
     said, "Do you hate him, for he deserves more
     than that from the Khumlus." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 638: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     'Ali bin Abi Talib sent a piece of gold not yet
     taken out of its ore, in a tanned leather container
     to Allah's Apostle . Allah's Apostle distributed
     that amongst four Persons: 'Uyaina bin Badr,
     Aqra bin Habis, Zaid Al-Khail and the fourth
     was either Alqama or Amir bin At Tufail. On
     that, one of his companions said, "We are more
     deserving of this (gold) than these (persons)."
     When that news reached the Prophet , he said,
     "Don't you trust me though I am the truth worthy
     man of the One in the Heavens, and I receive the
     news of Heaven (i.e. Divine Inspiration) both in
     the morning and in the evening?" There got up a
     man with sunken eyes, raised cheek bones,
     raised forehead, a thick beard, a shaven head
     and a waist sheet that was tucked up and he
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! Be afraid of Allah." The
     Prophet said, "Woe to you! Am I not of all the
     people of the earth the most entitled to fear
     Allah?" Then that man went away. Khalid bin
     Al-Wahd said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I chop
     his neck off?" The Prophet said, "No, for he may
     offer prayers." Khalid said, "Numerous are those
     who offer prayers and say by their tongues (i.e.
     mouths) what is not in their hearts." Allah's
     Apostle said, "I have not been ordered (by
     Allah) to search the hearts of the people or cut
     open their bellies." Then the Prophet looked at
     him (i.e. that man) while the latter was going
     away and said, "From the offspring of this (man
     there will come out (people) who will recite the
     Qur'an continuously and elegantly but it will not
     exceed their throats. (They will neither
     understand it nor act upon it). They would go out
     of the religion (i.e. Islam) as an arrow goes
     through a game's body." I think he also said, "If I
     should be present at their time I would kill them
     as the nations a Thamud were killed." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 639: 

     Narrated 'Ata: 

     Jabir said, "The Prophet ordered 'Ali to keep the
     state of Ihram." Jabir added, "Ali bin Abi Talib
     returned (from Yemen) when he was a governor
     (of Yemen). The Prophet said to him, 'With what
     intention have you assumed the state of Ihram?'
     'Ali said, "I have assumed Ihram with an intention
     as that of the Prophet." Then the Prophet said (to
     him), 'Offer a Hadi and keep the state of Ihram in
     which you are now.' 'Ali slaughtered a Hadi on
     his behalf." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 640: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet assumed the state of Ihram for
     Umra and Hajj, and we to assumed it for Hajj
     with him. When we arrived at Mecca, the
     Prophet said, "Whoever does not possess a Hadi
     should regard his Ihram for Umra only." The
     Prophet had a Hadi with him. 'Ali bin Abi Talib
     came to us from Yemen with the intention of
     performing Hajj. The Prophet said (to him),
     "With what intention have you assumed the
     Ihram, for your wife is with us?" 'Ali said, "I
     assumed the lhram with the same intention as that
     of the Prophet ." The Prophet said, "Keep on the
     state of lhram, as we have got the Hadi." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 641: 

     Narrated Jarir: 

     In the Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance there was
     a house called Dhu-l-Khalasa or Al-Ka'ba
     Al-Yamaniya or Al-Ka'ba Ash-Shamiya. The
     Prophet said to me, "Won't you relieve me from
     Dhu-l-Khalasa?" So I set out with
     one-hundred-and-fifty riders, and we dismantled
     it and killed whoever was present there. Then I
     came to the Prophet and informed him, and he
     invoked good upon us and Al-Ahmas (tribe) . 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 642: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     Jarir said to me, The Prophet said to me, "Won't
     you relieve me from Dhu-l-Khalasa?" And that
     was a house (in Yemem belonging to the tribe of)
     Khatham called Al-Kaba Al Yamaniya. I
     proceeded with one-hundred and-fifty cavalry
     from Ahmas (tribe) who were horse riders. I
     used not to sit firm on horses, so the Prophet
     stroke me over my chest till I saw the mark of his
     fingers over my chest, and then he said, 'O Allah!
     Make him (i.e. Jarir) firm and one who guides
     others and is guided on the right path." So Jarir
     proceeded to it dismantled and burnt it, and then
     sent a messenger to Allah's Apostle. The
     messenger of Jarir said (to the Prophet), "By Him
     Who sent you with the Truth, I did not leave that
     place till it was like a scabby camel." The
     Prophet blessed the horses of Ahmas and their
     men five times. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 643: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     Jarir said "Allah's Apostle said to me, "Won't you
     relieve me from Dhul-Khalasa?" I replied, "Yes,
     (I will relieve you)." So I proceeded along with
     one-hundred and fifty cavalry from Ahmas tribe
     who were skillful in riding horses. I used not to sit
     firm over horses, so I informed the Prophet of
     that, and he stroke my chest with his hand till I
     saw the marks of his hand over my chest and he
     said, O Allah! Make him firm and one who
     guides others and is guided (on the right path).'
     Since then I have never fallen from a horse.
     Dhul-l--Khulasa was a house in Yemen
     belonging to the tribe of Khatham and Bajaila,
     and in it there were idols which were
     worshipped, and it was called Al-Ka'ba." Jarir
     went there, burnt it with fire and dismantled it.
     When Jarir reached Yemen, there was a man
     who used to foretell and give good omens by
     casting arrows of divination. Someone said to
     him. "The messenger of Allah's Apostle is present
     here and if he should get hold of you, he would
     chop off your neck." One day while he was using
     them (i.e. arrows of divination), Jarir stopped
     there and said to him, "Break them (i.e. the
     arrows) and testify that None has the right to be
     worshipped except Allah, or else I will chop off
     your neck." So the man broke those arrows and
     testified that none has the right to be worshipped
     except Allah. Then Jarir sent a man called Abu
     Artata from the tribe of Ahmas to the Prophet to
     convey the good news (of destroying
     Dhu-l-Khalasa). So when the messenger reached
     the Prophet, he said, "O Allah's Apostle! By Him
     Who sent you with the Truth, I did not leave it till
     it was like a scabby camel." Then the Prophet
     blessed the horses of Ahmas and their men five
     times. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 644: 

     Narrated Abu Uthman: 

     Allah's Apostle sent 'Amr bin Al As as the
     commander of the troops of Dhat-us-Salasil.
     'Amr bin Al-'As said, "(On my return) I came to
     the Prophet and said, 'Which people do you love
     most?' He replied, 'Aisha.' I said, 'From amongst
     the men?' He replied, 'Her father (Abu Bakr)'. I
     said, 'Whom (do you love) next?' He replied,
     "Umar.' Then he counted the names of many
     men, and I became silent for fear that he might
     regard me as the last of them." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 645: 

     Narrated Jarir: 

     While I was at Yemen, I met two men from
     Yemen called Dhu Kala and Dhu Amr, and I
     started telling them about Allah's Apostle. Dhu
     Amr said to me, "If what you are saying about
     your friend (i.e. the Prophet) is true, then he has
     died three days ago." Then both of them
     accompanied me to Medina, and when we had
     covered some distance on the way to Medina,
     we saw some riders coming from Medina. We
     asked them and they said, "Allah's Apostle has
     died and Abu Bakr has been appointed as the
     Caliph and the people are in a good state.' Then
     they said, "Tell your friend (Abu Bakr) that we
     have come (to visit him), and if Allah will, we will
     come again." So they both returned to Yemen.
     When I told Abu Bakr their statement, he said to
     me, "I wish you had brought them (to me)."
     Afterwards I met Dhu Amr, and he said to me,
     "O Jarir! You have done a favor to me and I am
     going to tell you something, i.e. you, the nation of
     'Arabs, will remain prosperous as long as you
     choose and appoint another chief whenever a
     former one is dead. But if authority is obtained
     by the power of the sword, then the rulers will
     become kings who will get angry, as kings get
     angry, and will be delighted as kings get
     delighted." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 646: 

     Narrated Wahab bin Kaisan: 

     Jabir bin Abdullah said, "Allah's Apostle sent
     troops to the sea coast and appointed Abu
     'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah as their commander, and
     they were 300 (men). We set out, and we had
     covered some distance on the way, when our
     journey food ran short. So Abu 'Ubaida ordered
     that all the food present with the troops be
     collected, and it was collected. Our journey food
     was dates, and Abu Ubaida kept on giving us
     our daily ration from it little by little (piecemeal)
     till it decreased to such an extent that we did not
     receive except a date each." I asked (Jabir),
     "How could one date benefit you?" He said, "We
     came to know its value when even that finished."
     Jabir added, "Then we reached the sea (coast)
     where we found a fish like a small mountain. The
     people (i.e. troops) ate of it for 18 nights (i.e.
     days). Then Abu 'Ubaida ordered that two of its
     ribs be fixed on the ground (in the form of an
     arch) and that a she-camel be ridden and passed
     under them. So it passed under them without
     touching them." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 647: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle sent us who were three-hundred
     riders under the command of Abu Ubaida bin
     Al-Jarrah in order to watch the caravan of the
     Quraish pagans. We stayed at the seashore for
     half a month and were struck with such severe
     hunger that we ate even the Khabt (i.e. the leaves
     of the Salam, a thorny desert tree), and because
     of that, the army was known as Jaish-ul-Khabt.
     Then the sea threw out, an animal (i.e. a fish)
     called Al-'Anbar and we ate of that for half a
     month, and rubbed its fat on our bodies till our
     bodies returned to their original state (i.e.
     became strong and healthy). Abu Ubaida took
     one of its ribs, fixed it on the ground; then he
     went to the tallest man of his companions (to let
     him pass under the rib). Once Sufyan said, "He
     took a rib from its parts and fixed it, and then
     took a man and camel and they passed from
     underneath it (without touching it). " Jabir added:
     There was a man amongst the people who
     slaughtered three camels and then slaughtered
     another three camels and then slaughtered other
     three camels, and then Abu 'Ubaida forbade him
     to do so. 

     Narrated Abu Salih: Qais bin Sad said to his
     father. "I was present in the army and the people
     were struck with severe hunger." He said, "You
     should have slaughtered (camels) (for them)."
     Qais said, "I did slaughter camels but they were
     hungry again. He said, "You should have
     slaughtered (camels) again." Qais said, "I did
     slaughter (camels) again but the people felt
     hungry again." He said, "You should have
     slaughtered (camels) again." Qais said, "I did
     slaughter (camels) again, but the people again felt
     hungry." He said, "You should have slaughtered
     (camels) again." Qais said, "But I was forbidden
     (by Abu 'Ubaida this time)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 648: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     We set out in the army of Al-Khabt and Abu
     Ubaida was the commander of the troops. We
     were struck with severe hunger and the sea
     threw out a dead fish the like of which we had
     never seen, and it was called Al-'Anbar. We ate
     of it for half a month. Abu Ubaida took (and
     fixed) one of its bones and a rider passed
     underneath it (without touching it). (Jabir added:)
     Abu 'Ubaida said (to us), "Eat (of that fish)."
     When we arrived at Medina, we informed the
     Prophet about that, and he said, "Eat, for it is
     food Allah has brought out for you, and feed us if
     you have some of it." So some of them gave him
     (of that fish) and he ate it. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 649: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     That during the Hajj in which the Prophet had
     made Abu Bakr As Siddiq as chief of the, Hajj
     before the Hajj-ul-Wida,' on the day of Nahr,
     Abu Bakr sent him along with a group of persons
     to announce to the people. "No pagan is
     permitted to perform Hajj after this year, and
     nobody is permitted to perform the Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba naked." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 650: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The last Sura which was revealed in full was
     Baraa (i.e. Sura-at-Tauba), and the last Sura (i.e.
     part of a Sura) which was revealed was the last
     Verses of Sura-an-Nisa':-- "They ask you for a
     legal decision. Say: Allah directs (thus) About
     those who have No descendants or ascendants
     As heirs." (4.177) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 651: 

     Narrated 'Imran bin Hussein: 

     A delegation from Banu Tamim came to the
     Prophet . The Prophet said, "Accept the good
     tidings, O Banu Tamim!" They said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! You have given us good tidings, so give
     us (something)." Signs of displeasure appeared
     on his face. Then another delegation from Yemen
     came and he said (to them), "Accept the good
     tidings, for Banu Tamim refuses to accept them."
     They replied, "We have accepted them, O
     Allah's Apostle!" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 652: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I have not ceased to like Banu Tamim ever since
     I heard of three qualities attributed to them by
     Allah's Apostle (He said): They, out of all my
     followers, will be the strongest opponent of
     Ad-Dajjal; 'Aisha had a slave-girl from them, and
     the Prophet told her to manumit her as she was
     from the descendants of (the Prophet) Ishmael;
     and, when their Zakat was brought, the Prophet
     said, "This is the Zakat of my people." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 653: 

     Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika: 

     'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair said that a group of
     riders belonging to Banu Tamim came to the
     Prophet, Abu Bakr said (to the Prophet ),
     "Appoint Al-Qa'qa bin Mabad bin Zurara as
     (their) ruler." 'Umar said (to the Prophet). "No!
     But appoint Al-Aqra bin Habis." Thereupon Abu
     Bakr said (to 'Umar). "You just wanted to
     oppose me." 'Umar replied. "I did not want to
     oppose you." So both of them argued so much
     that their voices became louder, and then the
     following Divine Verses were revealed in that
     connection:-- "O you who believe ! Do not be
     forward in the presence of Allah and His
     Apostle..." (till the end of Verse)...(49.1) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 654: 

     Narrated Abu Jamra: 

     I said to Ibn 'Abbas, "I have an earthenware pot
     containing Nabidh (i.e. water and dates or
     grapes) for me, and I drink of it while it is sweet.
     If I drink much of it and stay with the people for
     a long time, I get afraid that they may discover it
     (for I will appear as if I were drunk). Ibn 'Abbas
     said, "A delegation of Abdul Qais came to
     Allah's Apostle and he said, "Welcome, O
     people! Neither will you have disgrace nor will
     you regret." They said, "O Allah's Apostle! There
     are the Mudar pagans between you and us, so
     we cannot come to you except in the sacred
     Months. So please teach us some orders on
     acting upon which we will enter Paradise.
     Besides, we will preach that to our people who
     are behind us." The Prophet said, "I order you to
     do four things and forbid you from four things (I
     order you): To believe in Allah...Do you know
     what is to believe in Allah? That is to testify that
     None has the right to be worshipped except
     Allah: (I order you also to offer prayers perfectly
     to pay Zakat; and to fast the month of Ramadan
     and to give the Khumus (i.e. one-fifth of the
     booty) (for Allah's Sake). I forbid you from four
     other things (i.e. the wine that is prepared in)
     Ad-Dubba, An-Naquir, Az-Hantam and
     Al-Muzaffat. (See Hadith No. 50 Vol. 1) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 655: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The delegation of 'Abdul Qais came to the
     Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle We belong
     to the tribe of Rabia. The infidels of Mudar tribe
     intervened between us and you so that we cannot
     come to you except in the Sacred Months, so
     please order us some things we may act on and
     invite those left behind to act on. The Prophet
     said, "I order you to observe four things and
     forbid you from four things: (I order you) to
     believe in Allah, i.e. to testify that None has the
     right to be worshipped except Allah." The
     Prophet pointed with finger indicating one and
     added, "To offer prayers perfectly: to give Zakat,
     and to give one-fifth of the booty you win (for
     Allah's Sake). I forbid you to use Ad-Dubba',
     An-Naquir, Al-Hantam and Al-Muzaffat,
     (Utensils used for preparing alcoholic liquors and
     drinks) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 656: 

     Narrated Bukair: 

     That Kuraib, the freed slave of Ibn Abbas told
     him that Ibn Abbas, 'Abdur-Rahman bin Azhar
     and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama sent him to 'Aisha
     saying, "Pay her our greetings and ask her about
     our offering of the two-Rak'at after 'Asr Prayer,
     and tell her that we have been informed that you
     offer these two Rakat while we have heard that
     the Prophet had forbidden their offering." Ibn
     'Abbas said, "I and 'Umar used to beat the
     people for their offering them." Kuraib added, "I
     entered upon her and delivered their message to
     her.' She said, 'Ask Um Salama.' So, I informed
     them (of 'Aisha's answer) and they sent me to
     Um Salama for the same purpose as they sent
     me to 'Aisha. Um Salama replied, 'I heard the
     Prophet forbidding the offering of these two
     Rakat. Once the Prophet offered the 'Asr prayer,
     and then came to me. And at that time some
     Ansari women from the Tribe of Banu Haram
     were with me. Then (the Prophet ) offered those
     two Rakat, and I sent my (lady) servant to him,
     saying, 'Stand beside him and say (to him): Um
     Salama says, 'O Allah's Apostle! Didn't I hear
     you forbidding the offering of these two Rakat
     (after the Asr prayer yet I see you offering them?'
     And if he beckons to you with his hand, then wait
     behind.' So the lady slave did that and the
     Prophet beckoned her with his hand, and she
     stayed behind, and when the Prophet finished his
     prayer, he said, 'O the daughter of Abu Umaiya
     (i.e. Um Salama), You were asking me about
     these two Rakat after the 'Asr prayer. In fact,
     some people from the tribe of 'Abdul Qais came
     to me to embrace Islam and busied me so much
     that I did not offer the two Rakat which were
     offered after Zuhr compulsory prayer, and these
     two Rakat (you have seen me offering) make up
     for those." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 657: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The first Friday (i.e. Jumua) prayer offered after
     the Friday Prayer offered at the Mosque of
     Allah's Apostle was offered at the mosque of
     Abdul Qais situated at Jawathi, that is a village at
     Al Bahrain . 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 658: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet sent some cavalry towards Najd
     and they brought a man from the tribe of Banu
     Hanifa who was called Thumama bin Uthal. They
     fastened him to one of the pillars of the Mosque.
     The Prophet went to him and said, "What have
     you got, O Thumama?" He replied," I have got a
     good thought, O Muhammad! If you should kill
     me, you would kill a person who has already
     killed somebody, and if you should set me free,
     you would do a favor to one who is grateful, and
     if you want property, then ask me whatever
     wealth you want." He was left till the next day
     when the Prophet said to him, "What have you
     got, Thumama? He said, "What I told you, i.e. if
     you set me free, you would do a favor to one
     who is grateful." The Prophet left him till the day
     after, when he said, "What have you got, O
     Thumama?" He said, "I have got what I told you.
     "On that the Prophet said, "Release Thumama."
     So he (i.e. Thumama) went to a garden of
     date-palm trees near to the Mosque, took a bath
     and then entered the Mosque and said, "I testify
     that None has the right to be worshipped except
     Allah, and also testify that Muhammad is His
     Apostle! By Allah, O Muhammad! There was no
     face on the surface of the earth most disliked by
     me than yours, but now your face has become
     the most beloved face to me. By Allah, there was
     no religion most disliked by me than yours, but
     now it is the most beloved religion to me. By
     Allah, there was no town most disliked by me
     than your town, but now it is the most beloved
     town to me. Your cavalry arrested me (at the
     time) when I was intending to perform the 'Umra.
     And now what do you think?" The Prophet gave
     him good tidings (congratulated him) and ordered
     him to perform the 'Umra. So when he came to
     Mecca, someone said to him, "You have become
     a Sabian?" Thumama replied, "No! By Allah, I
     have embraced Islam with Muhammad, Apostle
     of Allah. No, by Allah! Not a single grain of
     wheat will come to you from Jamaica unless the
     Prophet gives his permission." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 659: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Musailima Al-Kadhdhab came during the lifetime
     of the Prophet and started saying, "If Muhammad
     gives me the rule after him, I will follow him."
     And he came to Medina with a great number of
     the people of his tribe. Allah's Apostle went to
     him in the company of Thabit bin Qais bin
     Shammas, and at that time, Allah's Apostle had a
     stick of a date-palm tree in his hand. When he
     (i.e. the Prophet ) stopped near Musailima while
     the latter was amidst his companions, he said to
     him, "If you ask me for this piece (of stick), I will
     not give it to you, and Allah's Order you cannot
     avoid, (but you will be destroyed), and if you
     turn your back from this religion, then Allah will
     destroy you. And I think you are the same
     person who was shown to me in my dream, and
     this is Thabit bin Qais who will answer your
     questions on my behalf." Then the Prophet went
     away from him. I asked about the statement of
     Allah's Apostle : "You seem to be the same
     person who was shown to me in my dream," and
     Abu Huraira informed me that Allah's Apostle
     said, "When I was sleeping, I saw (in a dream)
     two bangles of gold on my hands and that
     worried me. And then I was inspired Divinely in
     the dream that I should blow on them, so I blew
     on them and both the bangles flew away. And I
     interpreted it that two liars (who would claim to
     be prophets) would appear after me. One of
     them has proved to be Al Ansi and the other,
     Musailima." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 660: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, I
     was given the treasures of the earth and two gold
     bangles were put in my hands, and I did not like
     that, but I received the inspiration that I should
     blow on them, and I did so, and both of them
     vanished. I interpreted it as referring to the two
     liars between whom I am present; the ruler of
     Sana and the Ruler of Yamaha." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 661: 

     Narrated Abu Raja Al-Utaridi: 

     We used to worship stones, and when we found
     a better stone than the first one, we would throw
     the first one and take the latter, but if we could
     not get a stone then we would collect some earth
     (i.e. soil) and then bring a sheep and milk that
     sheep over it, and perform the Tawaf around it.
     When the month of Rajab came, we used (to
     stop the military actions), calling this month the
     iron remover, for we used to remove and throw
     away the iron parts of every spear and arrow in
     the month of Rajab. Abu Raja' added: When the
     Prophet sent with (Allah's) Message, I was a boy
     working as a shepherd of my family camels.
     When we heard the news about the appearance
     of the Prophet, we ran to the fire, i.e. to
     Musailima al-Kadhdhab. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 662: 

     Narrated Ubaidullah bin Abdullah bin Utba: 

     We were informed that Musailima Al-Kadhdhab
     had arrived in Medina and stayed in the house of
     the daughter of Al-Harith. The daughter of
     Al-Harith bin Kuraiz was his wife and she was
     the mother of 'Abdullah bin 'Amir. There came to
     him Allah's Apostle accompanied by Thabit bin
     Qais bin Shammas who was called the orator of
     Allah's Apostle. Allah's Apostle had a stick in his
     hand then. The Prophet stopped before
     Musailima and spoke to him. Musailima said to
     him, "If you wish, we would not interfere
     between you and the rule, on condition that the
     rule will be ours after you... The Prophet said, "If
     you asked me for this stick, I would not give it to
     you. I think you are the same person who was
     shown to me in a dream. And this is Thabit bin
     Al-Qais who will answer you on my behalf." The
     Prophet then went away. I asked Ibn Abbas
     about the dream Allah's Apostle had mentioned.
     Ibn Abbas said, "Someone told me that the
     Prophet said, "When I was sleeping, I saw in a
     dream that two gold bangles were put in my
     hands, and that frightened me and made me
     dislike them. Then I was allowed to blow on
     them, and when I blew at them, both of them
     flew. Then I interpreted them as two liars who
     would appear.' One of them was Al-'Ansi who
     was killed by Fairuz in Yemen and the other was
     Musailima Al-Kadhdbab." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 663: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     Al-'Aqib and Saiyid, the rulers of Najran, came
     to Allah's Apostle with the intention of doing Lian
     one of them said to the other, "Do not do (this
     Lian) for, by Allah, if he is a Prophet and we do
     this Lian, neither we, nor our offspring after us
     will be successful." Then both of them said (to
     the Prophet ), "We will give what you should ask
     but you should send a trustworthy man with us,
     and do not send any person with us but an
     honest one." The Prophet said, "I will send an
     honest man who Is really trustworthy." Then
     every one of the companions of Allah's Apostle
     wished to be that one. Then the Prophet said,
     "Get up, O Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah." When
     he got up, Allah's Apostle said, "This is the
     Trustworthy man of this (Muslim) nation." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 664: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     The people of Najran came to the Prophet and
     said, "Send an honest man to us." The Prophet
     said, "I will send to you an honest man who is
     really trustworthy." Everyone of the (Muslim)
     people hoped to be that one. The Prophet then
     sent Abu Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 665: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Every nation has an Amin (i.e.
     the most honest man), and the Amin of this nation
     is Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarrah." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 666: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said to me, "If the revenue of
     Al-Bahrain should come, I will give you so much
     and so much," repeating "so much" thrice. But the
     revenue of Al-Bahrain did not come till Allah's
     Apostle had died. When the revenue came
     during the rule of Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr ordered
     an announcer to announce, "Whoever had any
     debt or promise due upon the Prophet, should
     present himself to me (i.e. Abu Bakr). I came to
     Abu Bakr and informed him that the Prophet had
     said (to me), "If the revenue of Al-Bahrain should
     come, I will give you so-much and so much,"
     repeating "so much" thrice. So Abu Bakr gave
     me (in another narration Jaibir said,). I met Abu
     Bakr after that and asked him (to give me what
     the Prophet had promised me) but he did not
     give me. I again went to him but he did not give
     me. I again went to him (for the third time) but he
     did not give me; On that I said to him, "I came to
     you but you did not give me, then I came to you
     and you did not give me, and then again I came
     to you, but you did not give me; so you should
     either give me or else you are like a miserly to
     me, on that, Abu Bakr said, "Do you say, 'You
     are like a miserly to me?' There is no worse
     disease than miserliness." Abu Bakr said it thrice
     and added, "Whenever I refused to give you, I
     had the intention of giving you." (In another
     narration) Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, "I went to
     Abu Bakr (and he gave me a handful of money)
     and told me to count it, I counted and found it
     five-hundred, and then Abu Bakr said (to me),
     "Take the same amount twice." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 667: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     My brother and I came from Yemen (to Medina)
     and remained for some time, thinking that Ibn
     Masud and his mother belonged to the family of
     the Prophet because of their frequent entrance
     (upon the Prophet) and their being attached to
     him. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 668: 

     Narrated Zahdam: 

     When Abu Musa arrived (at Kufa as a governor)
     he honored this family of Jarm (by paying them a
     visit). I was sitting near to him, and he was eating
     chicken as his lunch, and there was a man sitting
     amongst the people. Abu Musa invited the man
     to the lunch, but the latter said, "I saw chickens
     (eating something (dirty) so I consider them
     unclean." Abu Musa said, "Come on! I saw the
     Prophet eating it (i.e. chicken)." The man said "I
     have taken an oath that I will not ea (chicken)"
     Abu Musa said." Come on! I will tell you about
     your oath. We, a group of Al-Ash'ariyin people
     went to the Prophet and asked him to give us
     something to ride, but the Prophet refused. Then
     we asked him for the second time to give us
     something to ride, but the Prophet took an oath
     that he would not give us anything to ride. After a
     while, some camels of booty were brought to the
     Prophet and he ordered that five camels be given
     to us. When we took those camels we said, "We
     have made the Prophet forget his oath, and we
     will not be successful after that." So I went to the
     Prophet and said, "O Allah' Apostle ! You took
     an oath that you would not give us anything to
     ride, but you have given us." He said, "Yes, for if
     I take an oath and later I see a better solution
     than that, I act on the later (and gave the
     expiation of that oaths" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 669: 

     Narrated Imran bin Husain: 

     The people of Banu Tamim came to Allah's
     Apostle, and he said, "Be glad (i.e. have good
     tidings). O Banu Tamim!" They said, "As you
     have given us good tidings then give us (some
     material things)." On that the features of Allah's
     Apostle changed (i.e. he took it ill). Then some
     people from Yemen came, and the Prophet said
     (to them) "Accept good tidings as Banu Tamim
     have not accepted them." They said, "We accept
     them, O Allah's Apostle!" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 670: 

     Narrated Abu Masud: The Prophet beckoned
     with his hand towards Yemen and said, "Belief is
     there." The harshness and mercilessness are the
     qualities of those farmers etc, who are busy with
     their camels and pay no attention to the religion
     (is towards 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 671: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The people of Yemen have
     come to you and they are more gentle and
     soft-hearted. Belief is Yemenite and Wisdom is
     Yemenite, while pride and haughtiness are the
     qualities of the owners of camels (i.e. bedouins).
     Calmness and solemnity are the characters of the
     owners of sheep." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 672: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Belief is Yemenite while
     afflictions appear from there (the east) from
     where the side of the head of Satan will appear." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 673: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The people of Yemen have
     come to you, and they are more soft hearted and
     gentle hearted people. The capacity for
     understanding religion is Yemenite and Wisdom
     is Yemenite." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 674: 

     Narrated Alqama: 

     We were sitting with Ibn Masud when Khabbab
     came and said, "O Abu Abdur-Rahman! Can
     these young fellows recite Qur'an as you do?"
     Ibn Mas'ud said, "If you wish I can order one of
     them to recite (Qur'an) for you ." Khabbab
     replied, "Yes. "Ibn Mas'ud said, "Recite, O
     'Alqama!" On that, Zaid bin Hudair, the brother
     of Ziyad bin Hudair said, (to Ibn Mas'ud), "Why
     have you ordered 'Alqama to recite though he
     does not recite better than we?" Ibn Mas'ud said,
     "If you like, I would tell you what the Prophet
     said about your nation and his (i.e. 'Alqama's)
     nation." So I recited fifty Verses from
     Sura-Maryam. 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) said to
     Khabbab, "What do you think (about 'Alqama's
     recitation)?" Khabbab said, "He has recited
     well." 'Abdullah said, "Whatever I recite,
     'Alqama recites." Then 'Abdullah turned towards
     Khabbab and saw that he was wearing a gold
     ring, whereupon he said, "Hasn't the time for its
     throwing away come yet?" Khabbab said, "You
     will not see me wearing it after today," and he
     throw it away. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 675: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Tufail bin 'Amr came to the Prophet and said,
     "The Daus (nation) have perished as they
     disobeyed and refused to accept Islam. So
     invoke Allah against them." But the Prophet said,
     "O Allah! Give guidance to the Daus (tribe) and
     bring them (to Islam)!" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 676: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     When I came to the Prophet said on my way, "O
     what a long tedious tiresome night; nevertheless,
     it has rescued me from the place of Heathenism."
     A slave of mine ran away on the way. When I
     reached the Prophet I gave him the oath of
     allegiance (for Islam), and while I was sitting with
     him, suddenly the slave appeared. The Prophet
     said to me. "O Abu Huraira! Here is your slave,"
     I said, "He (i.e. the slave) is (free) for Allah's
     Sake," and manumitted him. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 677: 

     Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim: 

     We came to 'Umar in a delegation (during his
     rule). He started calling the men one by one,
     calling each by his name. (As he did not call me
     early) I said to him. "Don't you know me, O chief
     of the Believers?" He said, "Yes, you embraced
     Islam when they (i.e. your people) disbelieved;
     you have come (to the Truth) when they ran
     away; you fulfilled your promises when they
     broke theirs; and you recognized it (i.e. the Truth
     of Islam) when they denied it." On that, 'Adi said,
     "I therefore don't care." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 678: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We went out with Allah's Apostle during
     Hajjat-ul-Wada' and we assumed the Ihram for
     'Umra. Then Allah's Apostle said to us,
     "Whoever has got the Hadi should assume the
     Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra and should not finish
     his Ihram till he has performed both ('Umra and
     Hajj)." I arrived at Mecca along with him (i.e. the
     Prophet ) while I was menstruating, so I did not
     perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba or between
     Safa and Marwa. I informed Allah's Apostle
     about that and he said, "Undo your braids and
     comb your hair, and then assume the lhram for
     Hajj and leave the 'Umra." I did so, and when
     we performed and finished the Hajj, Allah's
     Apostles sent me to At-Tanim along with (my
     brother) 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr
     As-Siddiq, to perform the 'Umra. The Prophet
     said, "This 'Umra is in lieu of your missed 'Umra."
     Those who had assumed the lhram for 'Umra,
     performed the Tawaf around the Ka'ba and
     between Safa and Marwa, and then finished their
     Ihram, and on their return from Mina, they
     performed another Tawaf (around the Ka'ba and
     between Safa and Marwa), but those who
     combined their Hajj and 'Umra, performed only
     one Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa) (for
     both). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 679: 

     Narrated Ibn Juraij: 

     'Ata' said, "Ibn 'Abbas said, 'If he (i.e. the one
     intending to perform 'Umra) has performed the
     Tawaf around the Ka'ba, his Ihram is considered
     to have finished.' said, 'What proof does Ibn
     'Abbas has as to this saying?" 'Ata' said, "(The
     proof is taken) from the Statement of Allah:--
     "And afterwards they are brought For sacrifice
     unto Ancient House (Ka'ba at Mecca)" (22.33)
     and from the order of the Prophet to his
     companions to finish their Ihram during
     Hajjat-ul-Wada." I said (to 'Ata'), "That (i.e.
     finishing the Ihram) was after coming form
     'Arafat." 'Ata' said, "Ibn 'Abbas used to allow it
     before going to 'Arafat (after finishing the 'Umra)
     and after coming from it (i.e. after performing the
     Hajj)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 680: 

     Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari: 

     I came to the Prophet at a place called
     Al-Batha'. The Prophet said, "Did you assume
     the Ihram for Hajj?" I said, "Yes," He said, "How
     did you express your intention (for performing
     Hajj)? " I said, "Labbaik (i.e. I am ready) to
     assume the Ihram with the same intention as that
     of Allah's Apostle." The Prophet said, "Perform
     the Tawaf around the Ka'ba and between Safa
     and Marwa, and then finish your Ihram." So I
     performed the Tawaf around the Ka'ba and
     between Safa and Marwa and then I came to a
     woman from the tribe of Qais who removed the
     lice from my head. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 681: 

     Narrated Hafsa: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) The Prophet ordered all
     his wives to finish their Ihram during the year of
     Hajjat-ul-Wada. On that, I asked the Prophet
     "What stops you from finishing your lhram?" He
     said, "I have matted my hair and garlanded my
     Hadi. So I will not finish my Ihram unless I have
     slaughtered my Hadi." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 682: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     A woman from the tribe of Khath'am asked for
     the verdict of Allah's Apostle (regarding
     something) during Hajjat-ul-Wada' while Al-Fadl
     bin 'Abbas was the companion-rider behind
     Allah's Apostle. She asked, "Allah's ordained
     obligation (i.e. compulsory Hajj) enjoined on His
     slaves has become due on my old father who
     cannot sit firmly on the riding animal. Will it be
     sufficient if I perform the Hajj on his behalf?" He
     said, "Yes." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 683: 

     Narrated (Abdullah) bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet arrived (at Mecca) in the year of the
     Conquest (of Mecca) while Usama was riding
     behind him on (his she-camel)'. Al-Qaswa.' Bilal
     and 'Uthman bin Talha were accompanying him.
     When he made his she-camel kneel down near
     the Ka'ba, he said to 'Uthman, "Get us the key
     (of the Ka'ba). He brought the key to him and
     opened the gate (of the Ka'ba), for him. The
     Prophet, Usama, Bilal and 'Uthman (bin Talha)
     entered the Ka'ba and then closed the gate
     behind them (from inside). The Prophet stayed
     there for a long period and then came out. The
     people rushed to get in, but I went in before them
     and found Bilal standing behind the gate, and I
     said to him, "Where did the Prophet pray?" He
     said, "He prayed between those two front
     pillars." The Ka'ba was built on six pillars,
     arranged in two rows, and he prayed between
     the two pillars of the front row leaving the gate of
     the Ka'ba at his back and facing (in prayer) the
     wall which faces one when one enters the Ka'ba.
     Between him and that wall (was the distance of
     about three cubits). But I forgot to ask Bilal
     about the number of Rakat the Prophet had
     prayed. There was a red piece of marble at the
     place where he (i.e. the Prophet) had offered the
     prayer. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 684: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Safiya bin Huyai, the
     wife of the Prophet menstruated during
     Hajjat-ul-Wada' The Prophet said, "Is she going
     to detain us?" I said to him, "She has already
     come to Mecca and performed the Tawaf
     (ul-ifada) around the Ka'ba, O Allah's Apostle."
     The Prophet said, " Let her then proceed on (to
     Medina)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 685: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     We were talking about Hajjat-ul-Wada, while
     the Prophet was amongst us. We did not know
     what Hajjat-ul-Wada' signified. The Prophet
     praised Allah and then mentioned Al-Masih
     Ad-Dajjal and described him extensively, saying,
     "Allah did not send any prophet but that prophet
     warned his nation of Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal. Noah
     and the prophets following him warned (their
     people) of him. He will appear amongst you (O
     Muhammad's followers), and if it happens that
     some of his qualities may be hidden from you,
     but your Lord's State is clear to you and not
     hidden from you. The Prophet said it thrice.
     Verily, your Lord is not blind in one eye, while he
     (i.e. Ad-Dajjal) is blind in the right eye which
     looks like a grape bulging out (of its cluster). No
     doubt,! Allah has made your blood and your
     properties sacred to one another like the sanctity
     of this day of yours, in this town of yours, in this
     month of yours." The Prophet added: No doubt!
     Haven't I conveyed Allah's Message to you? "
     They replied, "Yes," The Prophet said thrice, "O
     Allah! Be witness for it." The Prophet added,
     "Woe to you!" (or said), "May Allah be merciful
     to you! Do not become infidels after me (i.e. my
     death) by cutting the necks (throats) of one
     another." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 686: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Arqam: 

     The Prophet fought nineteen Ghazwas and
     performed only one Hajj after he migrated (to
     Medina), and did not perform another Hajj after
     it, and that was Hajj-ul-Wada,' Abu Ishaq said,
     "He performed when he was in Mecca." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 687: 

     Narrated Jarir: 

     The Prophet ordered me during Hajjatul-Wada'.
     "Ask the people to listen." He then said, "Do not
     become infidels after me by cutting the necks
     (throats) of one another. " 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 688: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     The Prophet said, "Time has taken its original
     shape which it had when Allah created the
     Heavens and the Earth. The year is of twelve
     months, four of which are sacred, and out of
     these (four) three are in succession, i.e.
     Dhul-Qa'da, Dhul-Hijja and Al-Muharram, and
     the fourth is Rajab which is named after the
     Mudar tribe, between (the month of) Jumaida
     (ath-thania) and Sha'ban." Then the Prophet
     asked, "Which is this month?" We said, "Allah
     and His Apostle know better." On that the
     Prophet kept quiet so long that we thought that
     he might name it with another name. Then the
     Prophet said, "Isn't it the month of Dhul-Hijja?"
     We replied, "Yes." Then he said, "Which town is
     this?" "We replied, "Allah and His Apostle know
     better." On that he kept quiet so long that we
     thought that he might name it with another name.
     Then he said, "Isn't it the town of Mecca?" We
     replied, "Yes, " Then he said, "Which day is
     today?" We replied, "Allah and His Apostle
     know better." He kept quiet so long that we
     thought that he might name it with another name.
     Then he said, "Isn't it the day of An-Nahr (i.e.
     sacrifice)?" We replied, "Yes." He said, "So your
     blood, your properties, (The sub-narrator
     Muhammad said, 'I think the Prophet also said:
     And your honor..) are sacred to one another like
     the sanctity of this day of yours, in this city of
     yours, in this month of yours; and surely, you will
     meet your Lord, and He will ask you about your
     deeds. Beware! Do not become infidels after me,
     cutting the throats of one another. It is incumbent
     on those who are present to convey this message
     (of mine) to those who are absent. May be that
     some of those to whom it will be conveyed will
     understand it better than those who have actually
     heard it." (The sub-narrator, Muhammad, on
     remembering that narration, used to say,
     "Muhammad spoke the truth!") He (i.e. Prophet)
     then added twice, "No doubt! Haven't I
     conveyed (Allah's Message) to you?" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 689: 

     Narrated Tariq bin Shibab: 

     Some Jews said, "Had this Verse been revealed
     to us, we would have taken that day as 'Id
     (festival)." 'Umar said, "What Verse?" They
     said:-- "This day I have Perfected your religion
     for you, Completed My Favor upon you And
     have chosen for you Islam as your religion" (5.3)
     'Umar said, "I know the place where it was
     revealed; It was revealed while Allah's Apostle
     was staying at 'Arafat." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 690: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We set out with Allah's Apostle, and some of us
     assumed the lhram for 'Umra, some assumed it
     for Hajj, and some assumed it for both Hajj and
     'Umra. Allah's Apostle assumed the Ihram for
     Hajj. So those who had assumed the Ihram for
     Hajj or for both Hajj and 'Umra, did not finish
     their Ihram till the day of An-Nahr (i.e. slaughter
     of sacrifices). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 691: 

     Narrated Malik: 

     The same as above (Hadith 690), saying, "(We
     set out) with Allah's Apostle in
     Hajjat-ul-Wada'...)" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 692: 

     Narrated Malik: 

     The same as above (Hadith 690). 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 693: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     The Prophet visited me during Hajjat ul-Wada'
     while I was suffering from a disease which
     brought me to the verge of death. I said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! My ailment has reached such a
     (bad) state as you see, and I have much wealth,
     but I have no-one to inherit from me except my
     only daughter. Shall I give 2/3 of my property as
     alms (in charity)?" The Prophet said, "No," I
     said, "Shall I give half of my property as alms?"
     He said, "No." I said, "(Shall I give) 1/3 of it? "
     He replied, " 1/3, and even 1/3 is too much. It is
     better for you to leave your inheritors wealthy
     rather than to leave them poor, begging people
     (for their sustenance); and whatever you spend
     for Allah's Sake, you will get reward for it even
     for the morsel of food which you put in your
     wives mouth." I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Should
     I remain (in Mecca) behind my companions (who
     are going with you to Medina)?" The Prophet
     said, "If you remain behind, any good deed
     which you will do for Allah's Sake, will upgrade
     and elevate you. May be you will live longer so
     that some people may benefit by you and some
     other (i.e. infidels) may get harmed by you." The
     Prophet then added, "O Allah! Complete the
     Migration of my companions and do not turn
     them on their heels. But the poor Sad bin Khaula
     (not the above mentioned Sad) (died in Mecca)
     ." Allah's Apostle pitied Sad for he died in
     Mecca. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 694: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet got his head shaved during
     Hajjat-ul-Wada.' 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 695: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     During Hajjat-ul-Wada', the Prophet and some
     of his companions got their heads shaved while
     some of his companions got their head-hair cut
     short. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 696: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     That he came riding a donkey when Allah 's
     Apostle was standing at Mina during
     Hajjat-ul-Wada', leading the people in prayer.
     The donkey passed in front of a part of the row
     (of the people offering the prayer). Then he
     dismounted from it and took his position in the
     row with the people. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 697: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     In my presence, Usama was asked about the
     speed of the Prophet during his Hajj. He replied,
     "It was Al-'Anaq (i.e. moderate easy speed) and
     if he encountered an open space, he used to
     increase his speed." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 698: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Yazid Al-Khatmi: 

     That Abu Aiyub informed him that he offered the
     Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers together with the
     Prophet during Hajjat-ul-Wada. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 699: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     My Companions sent me to Allah's Apostle to
     ask him for some animals to ride on as they were
     accompanying him in the army of Al-Usra, and
     that was the Ghazwa (Battle) of Tabuk, I said,
     "O Allah's Prophet! My companions have sent
     me to you to provide them with means of
     transportation." He said, "By Allah! I will not
     make you ride anything." It happened that when I
     reached him, he was in an angry mood, and I
     didn't notice it. So I returned in a sad mood
     because of the refusal the Prophet and for the
     fear that the Prophet might have become 'angry
     with me. So I returned to my companions and
     informed them of what the Prophet had said.
     Only a short while had passed when I heard Bilal
     calling, "O 'Abdullah bin Qais!" I replied to his
     call. Bilal said, "Respond to Allah's Apostle who
     is calling you." When I went to him (i.e. the
     Prophet), he said, "Take these two camels tied
     together and also these two camels tied
     together,"' referring to six camels he had brought
     them from Sad at that time. The Prophet added,
     "Take them to your companions and say, 'Allah
     (or Allah's Apostle ) allows you to ride on these,'
     so ride on them." So I took those camels to them
     and said, "The Prophet allows you to ride on
     these (camels) but by Allah, I will not leave you
     till some of you proceed with me to somebody
     who heard the statement of Allah's Apostle. Do
     not think that I narrate to you a thing which
     Allah's Apostle has not said." They said to me,
     "We consider you truthful, and we will do what
     you like." The sub-narrator added: So Abu Musa
     proceeded along with some of them till they
     came to those who have heard the statement of
     Allah's Apostle wherein he denied them (some
     animals to ride on) and (his statement) whereby
     he gave them the same. So these people told
     them the same information as Abu Musa had told
     them. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 700: 

     Narrated Sad: 

     Allah's Apostle set out for Tabuk. appointing 'Ali
     as his deputy (in Medina). 'Ali said, "Do you
     want to leave me with the children and women?"
     The Prophet said, "Will you not be pleased that
     you will be to me like Aaron to Moses? But
     there will be no prophet after me." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 701: 

     Narrated Safwan bin Yala bin Umaiya: 

     that his father said, "I participated in Al-Usra (i.e.
     Tabuk) along with the Prophet." Yala added,
     "(My participation in) that Ghazwa was the best
     of my deeds to me." Ya'la said, "I had a laborer
     who quarrelled with somebody, and one of the
     two bit the hand of the other ('Ata', the
     sub-narrator, said, "Safwan told me who bit
     whom but I forgot it"), and the one who was
     bitten, pulled his hand out of the mouth of the
     biter, so one of the incisors of the biter was
     broken. So we came to the Prophet and he
     considered the biter's claim as invalid (i.e. the
     biter did not get a recompense for his broken
     incisor). The Prophet said, "Should he leave his
     hand in your mouth so that you might snap it as if
     it were in the mouth of a male camel to snap it?" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 702: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Kab bin Malik: 

     Who, from among Kab's sons, was the guide of
     Kab when he became blind: I heard Kab bin
     Malik narrating the story of (the Ghazwa of)
     Tabuk in which he failed to take part. Kab said,
     "I did not remain behind Allah's Apostle in any
     Ghazwa that he fought except the Ghazwa of
     Tabuk, and I failed to take part in the Ghazwa of
     Badr, but Allah did not admonish anyone who
     had not participated in it, for in fact, Allah's
     Apostle had gone out in search of the caravan of
     Quraish till Allah made them (i.e. the Muslims)
     and their enemy meet without any appointment. I
     witnessed the night of Al-'Aqaba (pledge) with
     Allah's Apostle when we pledged for Islam, and
     I would not exchange it for the Badr battle
     although the Badr battle is more popular amongst
     the people than it (i.e. Al-'Aqaba pledge). As for
     my news (in this battle of Tabuk), I had never
     been stronger or wealthier than I was when I
     remained behind the Prophet in that Ghazwa. 

     By Allah, never had I two she-camels before, but
     I had then at the time of this Ghazwa. Whenever
     Allah's Apostle wanted to make a Ghazwa, he
     used to hide his intention by apparently referring
     to different Ghazwa till it was the time of that
     Ghazwa (of Tabuk) which Allah's Apostle fought
     in severe heat, facing, a long journey, desert, and
     the great number of enemy. So the Prophet
     announced to the Muslims clearly (their
     destination) so that they might get prepared for
     their Ghazwa. So he informed them clearly of the
     destination he was going to. Allah's Apostle was
     accompanied by a large number of Muslims who
     could not be listed in a book namely, a register."
     Ka'b added, "Any man who intended to be
     absent would think that the matter would remain
     hidden unless Allah revealed it through Divine
     Revelation. So Allah's Apostle fought that
     Ghazwa at the time when the fruits had ripened
     and the shade looked pleasant. Allah's Apostle
     and his companions prepared for the battle and I
     started to go out in order to get myself ready
     along with them, but I returned without doing
     anything. I would say to myself, 'I can do that.'
     So I kept on delaying it every now and then till
     the people got ready and Allah's Apostle and the
     Muslims along with him departed, and I had not
     prepared anything for my departure, and I said, I
     will prepare myself (for departure) one or two
     days after him, and then join them.' In the
     morning following their departure, I went out to
     get myself ready but returned having done
     nothing. Then again in the next morning, I went
     out to get ready but returned without doing
     anything. 

     Such was the case with me till they hurried away
     and the battle was missed (by me). Even then I
     intended to depart to take them over. I wish I
     had done so! But it was not in my luck. So, after
     the departure of Allah's Apostle, whenever I
     went out and walked amongst the people (i.e, the
     remaining persons), it grieved me that I could see
     none around me, but one accused of hypocrisy
     or one of those weak men whom Allah had
     excused. Allah's Apostle did not remember me
     till he reached Tabuk. So while he was sitting
     amongst the people in Tabuk, he said, 'What did
     Ka'b do?' A man from Banu Salama said, 'O
     Allah's Apostle! He has been stopped by his two
     Burdas (i.e. garments) and his looking at his own
     flanks with pride.' Then Mu'adh bin Jabal said,
     'What a bad thing you have said! By Allah! O
     Allahs Apostle! We know nothing about him but
     good.' Allah's Apostle kept silent." Ka'b bin
     Malik added, "When I heard that he (i.e. the
     Prophet ) was on his way back to Medina. I got
     dipped in my concern, and began to think of false
     excuses, saying to myself, 'How can I avoid his
     anger tomorrow?' And I took the advice of wise
     member of my family in this matter. When it was
     said that Allah's Apostle, had come near all the
     evil false excuses abandoned from my mind and I
     knew well that I could never come out of this
     problem by forging a false statement. Then I
     decided firmly to speak the truth. So Allah's
     Apostle arrived in the morning, and whenever he
     returned from a journey., he used to visit the
     Mosque first of all and offer a two-Rak'at prayer
     therein and then sit for the people. So when he
     had done all that (this time), those who had failed
     to join the battle (of Tabuk) came and started
     offering (false) excuses and taking oaths before
     him. They were something over eighty men;
     Allah's Apostle accepted the excuses they had
     expressed, took their pledge of allegiance asked
     for Allah's Forgiveness for them, and left the
     secrets of their hearts for Allah to judge. Then I
     came to him, and when I greeted him, he smiled
     a smile of an angry person and then said, 'Come
     on.' So I came walking till I sat before him. He
     said to me, 'What stopped you from joining us.
     Had you not purchased an animal For carrying
     you?' I answered, "Yes, O Allah's Apostle! But
     by Allah, if I were sitting before any person from
     among the people of the world other than you, I
     would have avoided his anger with an excuse. 

     By Allah, I have been bestowed with the power
     of speaking fluently and eloquently, but by Allah,
     I knew well that if today I tell you a lie to seek
     your favor, Allah would surely make you angry
     with me in the near future, but if I tell you the
     truth, though you will get angry because of it, I
     hope for Allah's Forgiveness. Really, by Allah,
     there was no excuse for me. By Allah, I had
     never been stronger or wealthier than I was when
     I remained behind you.' Then Allah's Apostle
     said, 'As regards this man, he has surely told the
     truth. So get up till Allah decides your case.' I got
     up, and many men of Banu Salama followed me
     and said to me. 'By Allah, we never witnessed
     you doing any sin before this. Surely, you failed
     to offer excuse to Allah's Apostle as the others
     who did not join him, have offered. The prayer of
     Allah's Apostle to Allah to forgive you would
     have been sufficient for you.' By Allah, they
     continued blaming me so much that I intended to
     return (to the Prophet) and accuse myself of
     having told a lie, but I said to them, 'Is there
     anybody else who has met the same fate as I
     have?' They replied, 'Yes, there are two men
     who have said the same thing as you have, and to
     both of them was given the same order as given
     to you.' I said, 'Who are they?' They replied,
     Murara bin Ar-Rabi Al-Amri and Hilal bin
     Umaiya Al-Waqifi.' By that they mentioned to
     me two pious men who had attended the
     Ghazwa (Battle) of Badr, and in whom there was
     an example for me. So I did not change my mind
     when they mentioned them to me. Allah's
     Apostle forbade all the Muslims to talk to us, the
     three aforesaid persons out of all those who had
     remained behind in that Ghazwa. So we kept
     away from the people and they changed their
     attitude towards us till the very land (where I
     lived) appeared strange to me as if I did not
     know it. 

     We remained in that condition for fifty nights. As
     regards my two fellows, they remained in their
     houses and kept on weeping, but I was the
     youngest of them and the firmest of them, so I
     used to go out and witness the prayers along with
     the Muslims and roam about in the markets, but
     none would talk to me, and I would come to
     Allah's Apostle and greet him while he was sitting
     In his gathering after the prayer, and I would
     wonder whether the Prophet did move his lips in
     return to my greetings or not. Then I would offer
     my prayer near to him and look at him stealthily.
     When I was busy with my prayer, he would turn
     his face towards me, but when I turned my face
     to him, he would turn his face away from me.
     When this harsh attitude of the people lasted
     long, I walked till I scaled the wall of the garden
     of Abu Qatada who was my cousin and dearest
     person to me, and I offered my greetings to him.
     By Allah, he did not return my greetings. I said,
     'O Abu Qatada! I beseech you by Allah! Do you
     know that I love Allah and His Apostle?' He
     kept quiet. I asked him again, beseeching him by
     Allah, but he remained silent. Then I asked him
     again in the Name of Allah. He said, "Allah and
     His Apostle know it better.' Thereupon my eyes
     flowed with tears and I returned and jumped
     over the wall." Ka'b added, "While I was
     walking in the market of Medina, suddenly I saw
     a Nabati (i.e. a Christian farmer) from the
     Nabatis of Sham who came to sell his grains in
     Medina, saying, 'Who will lead me to Kab bin
     Malik?' The people began to point (me) out for
     him till he came to me and handed me a letter
     from the king of Ghassan in which the following
     was written: 

     "To proceed, I have been informed that your
     friend (i.e. the Prophet ) has treated you harshly.
     Anyhow, Allah does not let you live at a place
     where you feel inferior and your right is lost. So
     join us, and we will console you." 

     When I read it, I said to myself, 'This is also a
     sort of a test.' Then I took the letter to the oven
     and made a fire therein by burning it. When forty
     out of the fifty nights elapsed, behold ! There
     came to me the messenger of Allah's Apostle and
     said, 'Allah's Apostle orders you to keep away
     from your wife,' I said, 'Should I divorce her; or
     else! what should I do?' He said, 'No, only keep
     aloof from her and do not cohabit her.' The
     Prophet sent the same message to my two
     fellows. Then I said to my wife. 'Go to your
     parents and remain with them till Allah gives His
     Verdict in this matter." Kab added, "The wife of
     Hilal bin Umaiya came to Apostle and said, 'O
     Allah's Apostle! Hilal bin Umaiya is a helpless
     old man who has no servant to attend on him. Do
     you dislike that I should serve him? ' He said,
     'No (you can serve him) but he should not come
     near you.' She said, 'By Allah, he has no desire
     for anything. By, Allah, he has never ceased
     weeping till his case began till this day of his.' 

     On that, some of my family members said to me,
     'Will you also ask Allah's Apostle to permit your
     wife (to serve you) as he has permitted the wife
     of Hilal bin Umaiya to serve him?' I said, 'By
     Allah, I will not ask the permission of Allah's
     Apostle regarding her, for I do not know What
     Allah's Apostle would say if I asked him to
     permit her (to serve me) while I am a young
     man.' Then I remained in that state for ten more
     nights after that till the period of fifty nights was
     completed starting from the time when Allah's
     Apostle prohibited the people from talking to us.
     When I had offered the Fajr prayer on the 50th
     morning on the roof of one of our houses and
     while I was sitting in the condition which Allah
     described (in the Quran) i.e. my very soul
     seemed straitened to me and even the earth
     seemed narrow to me for all its spaciousness,
     there I heard the voice of one who had ascended
     the mountain of Sala' calling with his loudest
     voice, 'O Kab bin Malik! Be happy (by receiving
     good tidings).' I fell down in prostration before
     Allah, realizing that relief has come. Allah's
     Apostle had announced the acceptance of our
     repentance by Allah when he had offered the
     Fajr prayer. The people then went out to
     congratulate us. Some bringers of good tidings
     went out to my two fellows, and a horseman
     came to me in haste, and a man of Banu Aslam
     came running and ascended the mountain and his
     voice was swifter than the horse. When he (i.e.
     the man) whose voice I had heard, came to me
     conveying the good tidings, I took off my
     garments and dressed him with them; and by
     Allah, I owned no other garments than them on
     that day. Then I borrowed two garments and
     wore them and went to Allah's Apostle. 

     The people started receiving me in batches,
     congratulating me on Allah's Acceptance of my
     repentance, saying, 'We congratulate you on
     Allah's Acceptance of your repentance." Kab
     further said, "When I entered the Mosque. I saw
     Allah's Apostle sitting with the people around
     him. Talha bin Ubaidullah swiftly came to me,
     shook hands with me and congratulated me. By
     Allah, none of the Muhajirin (i.e. Emigrants) got
     up for me except him (i.e. Talha), and I will never
     forget this for Talha." Kab added, "When I
     greeted Allah's Apostle he, his face being bright
     with joy, said "Be happy with the best day that
     you have got ever since your mother delivered
     you." Kab added, "I said to the Prophet 'Is this
     forgiveness from you or from Allah?' He said,
     'No, it is from Allah.' Whenever Allah's Apostle
     became happy, his face would shine as if it were
     a piece of moon, and we all knew that
     characteristic of him. When I sat before him, I
     said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Because of the
     acceptance of my repentance I will give up all my
     wealth as alms for the Sake of Allah and His
     Apostle. Allah's Apostle said, 'Keep some of
     your wealth, as it will be better for you.' I said,
     'So I will keep my share from Khaibar with me,'
     and added, 'O Allah's Apostle! Allah has saved
     me for telling the truth; so it is a part of my
     repentance not to tell but the truth as long as I am
     alive. By Allah, I do not know anyone of the
     Muslims whom Allah has helped fortelling the
     truth more than me. Since I have mentioned that
     truth to Allah's Apostle till today, I have never
     intended to tell a lie. I hope that Allah will also
     save me (from telling lies) the rest of my life. So
     Allah revealed to His Apostle the Verse:-- 

     "Verily, Allah has forgiven the Prophet, the
     Muhajirin (i.e. Emigrants (up to His Saying) And
     be with those who are true (in word and deed)."
     (9.117-119) 

     By Allah, Allah has never bestowed upon me,
     apart from His guiding me to Islam, a Greater
     blessing than the fact that I did not tell a lie to
     Allah's Apostle which would have caused me to
     perish as those who have told a lie perished, for
     Allah described those who told lies with the
     worst description He ever attributed to anybody
     else. Allah said:-- "They (i.e. the hypocrites) will
     swear by Allah to you when you return to them
     (up to His Saying) Certainly Allah is not pleased
     with the rebellious people--" (9.95-96) Kab
     added, "We, the three persons, differed
     altogether from those whose excuses Allah's
     Apostle accepted when they swore to him. He
     took their pledge of allegiance and asked Allah
     to forgive them, but Allah's Apostle left our case
     pending till Allah gave His Judgment about it. As
     for that Allah said):-- And to the three (He did
     for give also) who remained behind." (9.118) 

     What Allah said (in this Verse) does not indicate
     our failure to take part in the Ghazwa, but it
     refers to the deferment of making a decision by
     the Prophet about our case in contrast to the
     case of those who had taken an oath before him
     and he excused them by accepting their excuses. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 703: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     When the Prophet passed by Al-Hijr, he said,
     "Do not enter the dwelling places of those people
     who were unjust to themselves unless you enter
     in a weeping state lest the same calamity as of
     theirs should befall you." Then he covered his
     head and made his speed fast till he crossed the
     valley. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 704: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said to his companions who were
     at Al-Hijr, "Do not enter upon these people who
     are being punished, except in a weeping state,
     lest the same calamity as of theirs should befall
     you..." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 705: 

     Narrated Urwa bin Al-Mughira: 

     Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba, said, "The Prophet went
     out to answer the call of nature and (when he had
     finished) I got up to pour water for him." I think
     that he said that the event had taken place during
     the Ghazwa of Tabuk. Al-Mughira added. "The
     Prophet washed his face, and when he wanted to
     wash his forearms, the sleeves of his cloak
     became tight over them, so he took them out
     from underneath the cloak and then he washed
     them (i.e. his forearms) and passed wet hands
     over his Khuffs." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 706: 

     Narrated Abu Humaid: We returned in the
     company of the Prophet from the Ghazwa of
     Tabuk, and when we looked upon Medina, the
     Prophet said, "This is Taba (i.e. Medina), and
     this is Uhud, a mountain that loves us and is
     loved by us." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 707: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle returned from the Ghazwa of
     Tabuk, and when he approached Medina, he
     said, "There are some people in Medina who
     were with you all the time, you did not travel any
     portion of the journey nor crossed any valley, but
     they were with you they (i.e. the people) said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Even though they were at
     Medina?" He said, "Yes, because they were
     stopped by a genuine excuse." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 708: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle sent a letter to Khosrau with
     Abdullah bin Hudhafa As-Sahmi and told him to
     hand it over to the governor of Al-Bahrain. The
     governor of Al-Bahrain handed it over to
     Khosrau, and when he read the latter, he tore it
     into pieces. (The sub-narrator added, "I think
     that Ibn Al-Musaiyab said, 'Allah 's Apostle
     invoked (Allah) to tear them all totally Khosrau
     and his companions) into pieces. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 709: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     During the days (of the battle) of Al-Jamal, Allah
     benefited me with a word I had heard from
     Allah's Apostle after I had been about to join the
     Companions of Al-Jamal (i.e. the camel) and
     fight along with them. When Allah's Apostle was
     informed that the Persians had crowned the
     daughter of Khosrau as their ruler, he said, "Such
     people as ruled by a lady will never be
     successful." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 710: 

     Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid: 

     I remember that I went out with the boys to (the
     place called) Thaniyat-ul-Wada to receive
     Allah's Apostle . 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 711: 

     Narrated As-Saib: 

     I remember I went out with the boys to
     Thaniyat-ul-Wada' to receive the Prophet when
     he returned from the Ghazwa of Tabuk. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 712: 

     Narrated Um Al-Fadl bint Al-Harith: 

     I heard the Prophet reciting Surat-al-Mursalat
     'Urfan (77) in the Maghrib prayer, and after that
     prayer he did not lead us in any prayer till he
     died. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 713: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     'Umar bin Al-Khattab used to let Ibn Abbas sit
     beside him, so 'AbdurRahman bin 'Auf said to
     'Umar, "We have sons similar to him." 'Umar
     replied, "(I respect him) because of his status that
     you know." 'Umar then asked Ibn 'Abbas about
     the meaning of this Holy Verse:-- "When comes
     the help of Allah and the conquest of Mecca . . ."
     (110.1) 

     Ibn 'Abbas replied, "That indicated the death of
     Allah's Apostle which Allah informed him of."
     'Umar said, "I do not understand of it except
     what you understand." 

     Narrated 'Aisha: The Prophet in his ailment in
     which he died, used to say, "O 'Aisha! I still feel
     the pain caused by the food I ate at Khaibar, and
     at this time, I feel as if my aorta is being cut from
     that poison." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 714: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle became ill, he used to
     recite Al-Muawidhatan (i.e. the last two Suras of
     the Qur'an) and then blow his breath and passed
     his hand over himself. When he had his fatal
     illness, I started reciting Al-Muawidhatan and
     blowing my breath over him as he used to do,
     and then I rubbed the hand of the Prophet over
     his body. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 715: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I heard the Prophet and listened to him before his
     death while he was Lying supported on his back,
     and he was saying, "O Allah! Forgive me, and
     bestow Your Mercy on me, and let me meet the
     (highest) companions (of the Hereafter)." See the
     Qur'an (4.69) and See Hadith No. 719. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 716: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Thursday! And how great that Thursday was!
     The ailment of Allah's Apostle became worse (on
     Thursday) and he said, fetch me something so
     that I may write to you something after which you
     will never go astray." The people (present there)
     differed in this matter, and it was not right to
     differ before a prophet. Some said, "What is
     wrong with him ? (Do you think ) he is delirious
     (seriously ill)? Ask him ( to understand his state
     )." So they went to the Prophet and asked him
     again. The Prophet said, "Leave me, for my
     present state is better than what you call me for."
     Then he ordered them to do three things. He
     said, "Turn the pagans out of the 'Arabian
     Peninsula; respect and give gifts to the foreign
     delegations as you have seen me dealing with
     them." (Said bin Jubair, the sub-narrator said that
     Ibn Abbas kept quiet as rewards the third order,
     or he said, "I forgot it.") (See Hadith No. 116
     Vol. 1) 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 717: 

     Narrated Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah: 

     Ibn Abbas said, "When Allah's Apostle was on
     his deathbed and there were some men in the
     house, he said, 'Come near, I will write for you
     something after which you will not go astray.'
     Some of them ( i.e. his companions) said, 'Allah's
     Apostle is seriously ill and you have the (Holy)
     Quran. Allah's Book is sufficient for us.' So the
     people in the house differed and started
     disputing. Some of them said, 'Give him writing
     material so that he may write for you something
     after which you will not go astray.' while the
     others said the other way round. So when their
     talk and differences increased, Allah's Apostle
     said, "Get up." Ibn Abbas used to say, "No
     doubt, it was very unfortunate (a great disaster)
     that Allah's Apostle was prevented from writing
     for them that writing because of their differences
     and noise." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 718: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet called Fatima during his fatal illness
     and told her something secretly and she wept.
     Then he called her again and told her something
     secretly, and she started laughing. When we
     asked her about that, she said, "The Prophet first
     told me secretly that he would expire in that
     disease in which he died, so I wept; then he told
     me secretly that I would be the first of his family
     to follow him, so I laughed ( at that time)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 719: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Used to hear (from the Prophet) that no Prophet
     dies till he is given the option to select either the
     worldly life or the life of the Hereafter. I heard
     the Prophet in his fatal disease, with his voice
     becoming hoarse, saying, "In the company of
     those on whom is the grace of Allah ..( to the end
     of the Verse )." (4.69) Thereupon I thought that
     the Prophet had been given the option. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 720: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When the Prophet fell ill in his fatal illness, he
     started saying, "With the highest companion." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 721: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     When Allah 's Apostle was in good health, he
     used to say, "Never does a prophet die unless he
     is shown his place in Paradise ( before his death
     ), and then he is made alive or given option."
     When the Prophet became ill and his last
     moments came while his head was on my thigh,
     he became unconscious, and when he came to
     his senses, he looked towards the roof of the
     house and then said, "O Allah! (Please let me be)
     with the highest companion." Thereupon I said,
     "Hence he is not going to stay with us? " Then I
     came to know that his state was the confirmation
     of the narration he used to mention to us while he
     was in good health. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 722: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr entered upon the
     Prophet while I was supporting the Prophet on
     my chest. 'AbdurRahman had a fresh Siwak then
     and he was cleaning his teeth with it. Allah's
     Apostle looked at it, so I took the Siwak, cut it
     (chewed it with my teeth), shook it and made it
     soft (with water), and then gave it to the Prophet
     who cleaned his teeth with it. I had never seen
     Allah's Apostle cleaning his teeth in a better way.
     After finishing the brushing of his teeth, he lifted
     his hand or his finger and said thrice, "O Allah!
     Let me be with the highest companions," and
     then died. 'Aisha used to say, "He died while his
     head was resting between my chest and chin." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 723: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle became ill, he used to
     recite the Muawidhatan and blow his breath over
     himself (after their recitation ) and rubbed his
     hands over his body. So when he was afflicted
     with his fatal illness. I started reciting the
     Muawidhatan and blowing my breath over him as
     he used to blow and made the hand of the
     Prophet pass over his body. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 724: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I heard the Prophet and listened to him before his
     death while he was leaning his back on me and
     saying, "O Allah! Forgive me, and bestow Your
     Mercy on me, and let me meet the companions." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 725: 

     Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair: 

     'Aisha said, "The Prophet said during his fatal
     illness, "Allah cursed the Jews for they took the
     graves of their prophets as places for worship."
     'Aisha added, "Had it not been for that
     (statement of the Prophet ) his grave would have
     been made conspicuous. But he was afraid that it
     might be taken as a place for worship." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 726: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet died while he was between my
     chest and chin, so I never dislike the death agony
     for anyone after the Prophet. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 727: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) "When the ailment of
     Allah's Apostle became aggravated, he
     requested his wives to permit him to be (treated)
     nursed in my house, and they gave him
     permission. He came out (to my house), walking
     between two men with his feet dragging on the
     ground, between 'Abbas bin 'Abdul--Muttalib
     and another man" 'Ubaidullah said, "I told
     'Abdullah of what 'Aisha had said, 'Abdullah bin
     'Abbas said to me, 'Do you know who is the
     other man whom 'Aisha did not name?' I said,
     'No.' Ibn 'Abbas said, 'It was 'Ali bin Abu Talib."
     'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet used to narrate
     saying, "When Allah's Apostle entered my house
     and his disease became aggravated, he said, "
     Pour on me the water of seven water skins, the
     mouths of which have not been untied, so that I
     may give advice to the people.' So we let him sit
     in a big basin belonging to Hafsa, the wife of the
     Prophet and then started to pour water on him
     from these water skins till he started pointing to
     us with his hands intending to say, 'You have
     done your job." 'Aisha added, "Then he went out
     to the people and led them in prayer and
     preached to them." 'Aisha and 'Abdullah bin
     'Abbas said, "When Allah's Apostle became ill
     seriously, he started covering his face with his
     woolen sheet, and when he felt short of breath,
     he removed it from hi; face and said, 'That is so!
     Allah's (curse be on the Jews and the Christians,
     as they took the graves of their prophets as
     (places of worship),' intending to warn (the
     Muslims ) of what they had done." 'Aisha added,
     "I argued with Allah's Apostle repeatedly about
     that matter (i.e. his order that Abu Bakr should
     lead the people in prayer in his place when he
     was ill), and what made me argue so much, was,
     that it never occurred to my mind that after the
     Prophet, the people would ever love a man who
     had taken his place, and I felt that anybody
     standing in his place, would be a bad omen to the
     people, so I wanted Allah's Apostle to give up
     the idea of choosing Abu Bakr (to lead the
     people in prayer)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 728: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas: 

     Ali bin Abu Talib came out of the house of
     Allah's Apostle during his fatal illness. The people
     asked, "O Abu Hasan (i.e. Ali)! How is the
     health of Allah's Apostle this morning?" 'Ali
     replied, "He has recovered with the Grace of
     Allah." 'Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib held him by
     the hand and said to him, "In three days you, by
     Allah, will be ruled (by somebody else ), And by
     Allah, I feel that Allah's Apostle will die from this
     ailment of his, for I know how the faces of the
     offspring of 'Abdul Muttalib look at the time of
     their death. So let us go to Allah's Apostle and
     ask him who will take over the Caliphate. If it is
     given to us we will know as to it, and if it is given
     to somebody else, we will inform him so that he
     may tell the new ruler to take care of us." 'Ali
     said, "By Allah, if we asked Allah's Apostle for it
     (i.e. the Caliphate) and he denied it us, the
     people will never give it to us after that. And by
     Allah, I will not ask Allah's Apostle for it." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 729: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     While the Muslims were offering the Fajr prayer
     on Monday and Abu Bakr was leading them in
     prayer, suddenly Allah's Apostle lifted the curtain
     of 'Aisha's dwelling and looked at them while
     they were in the rows of the prayers and smiled.
     Abu Bakr retreated to join the row, thinking that
     Allah's Apostle wanted to come out for the
     prayer. The Muslims were about to be put to trial
     in their prayer (i.e. were about to give up
     praying) because of being overjoyed at seeing
     Allah's Apostle. But Allah's Apostle beckoned
     them with his hand to complete their prayer and
     then entered the dwelling and let fall the curtain. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 730: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     It was one of the favors of Allah towards me that
     Allah's Apostle expired in my house on the day
     of my turn while he was leaning against my chest
     and Allah made my saliva mix with his saliva at
     his death. 'Abdur-Rahman entered upon me with
     a Siwak in his hand and I was supporting (the
     back of) Allah's Apostle (against my chest ). I
     saw the Prophet looking at it (i.e. Siwak) and I
     knew that he loved the Siwak, so I said ( to him
     ), "Shall I take it for you ? " He nodded in
     agreement. So I took it and it was too stiff for
     him to use, so I said, "Shall I soften it for you ?"
     He nodded his approval. So I softened it and he
     cleaned his teeth with it. In front of him there was
     a jug or a tin, (The sub-narrator, 'Umar is in
     doubt as to which was right) containing water.
     He started dipping his hand in the water and
     rubbing his face with it, he said, "None has the
     right to be worshipped except Allah. Death has
     its agonies." He then lifted his hands (towards the
     sky) and started saying, "With the highest
     companion," till he expired and his hand dropped
     down. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 731: 

     Narrated Urwa: 

     'Aisha said, "Allah's Apostle in his fatal illness,
     used to ask, 'Where will I be tomorrow? Where
     will I be tomorrow?", seeking 'Aisha's turn. His
     wives allowed him to stay wherever he wished.
     So he stayed at 'Aisha's house till he expired
     while he was with her." 'Aisha added, "The
     Prophet expired on the day of my turn in my
     house and he was taken unto Allah while his
     head was against my chest and his saliva mixed
     with my saliva." 'Aisha added, "Abdur-Rahman
     bin Abu Bakr came in, carrying a Siwak he was
     cleaning his teeth with. Allah's Apostle looked at
     it and I said to him, 'O 'AbdurRahman! Give me
     this Siwak.' So he gave it to me and I cut it,
     chewed it (it's end) and gave it to Allah's Apostle
     who cleaned his teeth with it while he was resting
     against my chest." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 732: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet expired in my house and on the day
     of my turn, leaning against my chest. One of us
     (i.e. the Prophet's wives ) used to recite a prayer
     asking Allah to protect him from all evils when he
     became sick. So I started asking Allah to protect
     him from all evils (by reciting a prayer ). He
     raised his head towards the sky and said, "With
     the highest companions, with the highest
     companions." 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr
     passed carrying a fresh leaf-stalk of a date-palm
     and the Prophet looked at it and I thought that
     the Prophet was in need of it (for cleaning his
     teeth ). So I took it (from 'Abdur Rahman) and
     chewed its head and shook it and gave it to the
     Prophet who cleaned his teeth with it, in the best
     way he had ever cleaned his teeth, and then he
     gave it to me, and suddenly his hand dropped
     down or it fell from his hand (i.e. he expired). So
     Allah made my saliva mix with his saliva on his
     last day on earth and his first day in the
     Hereafter. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 733: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Abu Bakr came from his house at As-Sunh on a
     horse. He dismounted and entered the Mosque,
     but did not speak to the people till he entered
     upon 'Aisha and went straight to Allah's Apostle
     who was covered with Hibra cloth (i.e. a kind of
     Yemenite cloth). He then uncovered the
     Prophet's face and bowed over him and kissed
     him and wept, saying, "Let my father and mother
     be sacrificed for you. By Allah, Allah will never
     cause you to die twice. As for the death which
     was written for you, has come upon you." 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: Abu Bakr went out while
     Umar bin Al-Khattab was talking to the people.
     Abu Bakr said, "Sit down, O 'Umar!" But 'Umar
     refused to sit down. So the people came to Abu
     Bakr and left Umar. Abu Bakr said, "To
     proceed, if anyone amongst you used to worship
     Muhammad , then Muhammad is dead, but if
     (anyone of) you used to worship Allah, then
     Allah is Alive and shall never die. Allah
     said:--"Muhammad is no more than an Apostle,
     and indeed (many) apostles have passed away
     before him..(till the end of the Verse )......Allah
     will reward to those who are thankful." (3.144)
     By Allah, it was as if the people never knew that
     Allah had revealed this Verse before till Abu
     Bakr recited it and all the people received it from
     him, and I heard everybody reciting it (then). 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: Said bin Al-Musaiyab told
     me that 'Umar said, "By Allah, when I heard Abu
     Bakr reciting it, my legs could not support me
     and I fell down at the very moment of hearing
     him reciting it, declaring that the Prophet had
     died." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 734: 

     Narrated Aisha and Ibn Abbas: 

     Abu Bakr kissed the Prophet after his death. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 735: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We poured medicine in one side of the Prophet's
     mouth during his illness and he started pointing to
     us, meaning to say, "Don't pour medicine in my
     mouth." We said, "(He says so) because a
     patient dislikes medicines." When he improved
     and felt a little better, he said, "Didn't I forbid you
     to pour medicine in my mouth ?" We said, " ( We
     thought it was because of) the dislike, patients
     have for medicines. He said, "Let everyone
     present in the house be given medicine by
     pouring it in his mouth while I am looking at him,
     except 'Abbas as he has not witnessed you
     (doing the same to me)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 736: 

     Narrated Al-Aswad: 

     It was mentioned in the presence of 'Aisha that
     the Prophet had appointed 'Ali as successor by
     will. Thereupon she said, "Who said so? I saw
     the Prophet, while I was supporting him against
     my chest. He asked for a tray, and then fell on
     one side and expired, and I did not feel it. So
     how (do the people say) he appointed 'Ali as his
     successor?" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 737: 

     Narrated Talha: 

     I asked 'Abdullah bin Abu 'Aufa "Did the
     Prophet make a will? ' He replied, "No." I further
     asked, "How comes it that the making of a will
     was enjoined on the people or that they were
     ordered to make it? " He said, "The Prophet
     made a will concerning Allah's Book." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 738: 

     Narrated 'Amir bin Al-Harith: 

     Allah's Apostle did not leave a Dinar or a Dirham
     or a male or a female slave. He left only his white
     mule on which he used to ride, and his weapons,
     and a piece of land which he gave in charity for
     the needy travelers. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 739: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When the ailment of the Prophet got aggravated,
     he became unconscious whereupon Fatima said,
     "Oh, how distressed my father is!" He said,
     "Your father will have no more distress after
     today." When he expired, she said, "O Father!
     Who has responded to the call of the Lord Who
     has invited him! O Father, whose dwelling place
     is the Garden of Paradise (i.e. Al-Firdaus)! O
     Father! We convey this news (of your death) to
     Gabriel." When he was buried, Fatima said, "O
     Anas! Do you feel pleased to throw earth over
     Allah's Apostle?" 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 740: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When the Prophet was healthy, he used to say,
     "No soul of a prophet is captured till he is shown
     his place in Paradise and then he is given the
     option." When death approached him while his
     head was on my thigh, he became unconscious
     and then recovered his consciousness. He then
     looked at the ceiling of the house and said, "O
     Allah! (with) the highest companions." I said (to
     myself), "Hence, he is not going to choose us."
     Then I realized that what he had said was the
     application of the narration which he used to
     mention to us when he was healthy. The last
     word he spoke was, "O Allah! (with) the highest
     companion." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 741: 

     Narrated Aisha and Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet stayed for ten years in Mecca with
     the Qur'an being revealed to him and he stayed in
     Medina for ten years.' 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 742: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah 's Apostle died when he was sixty-three
     years of age. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 743: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet died while his armor was mortgaged
     to a Jew for thirty Sa's of barley. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 744: 

     Narrated Salim's father: 

     The Prophet appointed Usama as the
     commander of the troops (to be sent to Syria).
     The Muslims spoke about Usama (unfavorably ).
     The Prophet said, " I have been informed that
     you spoke about Usama. (Let it be known that )
     he is the most beloved of all people to me." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 745: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle sent troops appointed Usama bin
     Zaid as their commander. The people criticized
     his leadership. Allah's Apostle got up and said,
     "If you (people) are criticizing his (i.e. Usama's)
     leadership you used to criticize the leadership of
     his father before. By Allah, he (i.e. Zaid)
     deserved the leadership indeed, and he used to
     be one of the most beloved persons to me, and
     now this (i.e. his son, Usama) is one of the most
     beloved persons to me after him." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 746: 

     Narrated Ibn Abu Habib: 

     Abu Al-Khair said, "As-Sanabih, I asked (me),
     'When did you migrate?' I (i.e. Abu Al-Khair)
     said, 'We went out from Yemen as emigrants and
     arrived at Al-Juhfa, and there came a rider whom
     I asked about the news. The rider said: We
     buried the Prophet five days ago." I asked
     (As-Sanabihi), 'Did you hear anything about the
     night of Qadr?' He replied, 'Bilal, the Mu'adhdhin
     of the Prophet informed me that it is on one of
     the seven nights of the last ten days (of
     Ramadan)." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 747: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     I asked Zaid bin Al-Arqam, "In how many
     Ghazawat did you take part in the company of
     Allah's Apostle?" He replied, "Seventeen." I
     further asked, "How many Ghazawat did the
     Prophet fight?" He replied, "Nineteen." 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 748: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     I fought fifteen Ghazawat in the company of the
     Prophet. 


Volume 5, Book 59, Number 749: 

     Narrated Buraida: 

     That he fought sixteen Ghazawat with Allah's
     Apostle. 




