
Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 13: 

            Friday Prayer 

Volume 2, Book 13, Number 1: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) saying, "We
     (Muslims) are the last (to come) but (will be) the
     foremost on the Day of Resurrection though the
     former nations were given the Holy Scriptures
     before us. And this was their day (Friday) the
     celebration of which was made compulsory for
     them but they differed about it. So Allah gave us
     the guidance for it (Friday) and all the other
     people are behind us in this respect: the Jews'
     (holy day is) tomorrow (i.e. Saturday) and the
     Christians' (is) the day after tomorrow (i.e.
     Sunday)." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 2: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Anyone of you
     attending the Friday (prayers) should take a
     bath." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 3: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     While Umar bin Al-Khattab was standing and
     delivering the sermon on a Friday, one of the
     companions of the Prophet, who was one of the
     foremost Muhajirs (emigrants) came. 'Umar said
     to him, "What is the time now?" He replied, "I
     was busy and could not go back to my house till
     I heard the Adhan. I did not perform more than
     the ablution." Thereupon 'Umar said to him, "Did
     you perform only the ablution although you know
     that Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) used to order us to
     take a bath (on Fridays)?" 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 4: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "The taking of a
     bath on Friday is compulsory for every male
     (Muslim) who has attained the age of puberty." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 5: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     I testify that Allah's Apostle said, "The taking of a
     bath on Friday is compulsory for every male
     Muslim who has attained the age of puberty and
     (also) the cleaning of his teeth with Siwak, and
     the using of perfume if it is available." Amr (a
     sub-narrator) said, "I confirm that the taking of a
     bath is compulsory, but as for the Siwak and the
     using of perfume, Allah knows better whether it
     is obligatory or not, but according to the Hadith it
     is as above.") 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 6: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Any person who
     takes a bath on Friday like the bath of Janaba
     and then goes for the prayer (in the first hour i.e.
     early), it is as if he had sacrificed a camel (in
     Allah's cause); and whoever goes in the second
     hour it is as if he had sacrificed a cow; and
     whoever goes in the third hour, then it is as if he
     had sacrificed a horned ram; and if one goes in
     the fourth hour, then it is as if he had sacrificed a
     hen; and whoever goes in the fifth hour then it is
     as if he had offered an egg. When the Imam
     comes out (i.e. starts delivering the Khutba), the
     angels present themselves to listen to the
     Khutba." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 7: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     While 'Umar (bin Al-Khattab) was delivering the
     Khutba on a Friday, a man entered (the
     mosque). 'Umar asked him, "What has detained
     you from the prayer?" The man said, "It was only
     that when I heard the Adhan I performed
     ablution (for the prayer)." On that 'Umar said,
     "Did you not hear the Prophet saying: 'Anyone of
     you going out for the Jumua prayer should take a
     bath'?". 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 8: 

     Narrated Salman-Al-Farsi: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Whoever takes a
     bath on Friday, purifies himself as much as he
     can, then uses his (hair) oil or perfumes himself
     with the scent of his house, then proceeds (for
     the Jumua prayer) and does not separate two
     persons sitting together (in the mosque), then
     prays as much as (Allah has) written for him and
     then remains silent while the Imam is delivering
     the Khutba, his sins in-between the present and
     the last Friday would be forgiven." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 9: 

     Narrated Tawus: 

     I said to Ibn 'Abbas, "The people are narrating
     that the Prophet said, 'Take a bath on Friday and
     wash your heads (i.e. take a thorough bath) even
     though you were not Junub and use perfume'."
     On that Ibn 'Abbas replied, "I know about the
     bath, (i.e. it is essential) but I do not know about
     the perfume (i.e. whether it is essential or not.)~ 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 10: 

     Narrated Tawus: 

     Ibn 'Abbas mentioned the statement of the
     Prophet regarding the taking of a bath on Friday
     and then I asked him whether the Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) had ordered perfume or (hair) oil to be
     used if they could be found in one's house. He
     (Ibn 'Abbas) replied that he did not know about
     it. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 11: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Umar bin Al-Khattab saw a silken cloak (being
     sold) at the gate of the Mosque and said to
     Allah's Apostle, "I wish you would buy this to
     wear on Fridays and also on occasions of the
     arrivals of the delegations." Allah's Apostle
     replied, "This will be worn by a person who will
     have no share (reward) in the Hereafter." Later
     on similar cloaks were given to Allah's Apostle
     and he gave one of them to 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab. On that 'Umar said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! You have given me this cloak although
     on the cloak of Atarid (a cloak merchant who
     was selling that silken cloak at the gate of the
     mosque) you passed such and such a remark."
     Allah's Apostle replied, "I have not given you this
     to wear". And so 'Umar bin Al-Khattab gave it
     to his pagan brother in Mecca to wear. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 12: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If I had not found it hard
     for my followers or the people, I would have
     ordered them to clean their teeth with Siwak for
     every prayer." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 13: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle I said, "I have told you
     repeatedly to (use) the Siwak. (The Prophet put
     emphasis on the use of the Siwak.) 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 14: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     When the Prophet (p.b.u.h) got up at night (for
     the night prayer), he used to clean his mouth . 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 15: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     AbdurRahman bin Abi Bakr came holding a
     Siwak with which he was cleaning his teeth.
     Allah's Apostle looked at him. I requested
     Abdur-Rahman to give the Siwak to me and
     after he gave it to me I divided it, chewed it and
     gave it to Allah's Apostle. Then he cleaned his
     teeth with it and (at that time) he was resting
     against my chest. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 16: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet used to recite the following in the
     Fajr prayer of Friday, "Alif, Lam, Mim, Tanzil"
     (Surat-as-Sajda #32) and "Hal-ata-ala-l-Insani"
     (i.e. Surah-Ad-Dahr #76). 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 17: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The first Jumua prayer which was offered after a
     Jumua prayer offered at the mosque of Allah's
     Apostle took place in the mosque of the tribe of
     'Abdul Qais at Jawathi in Bahrain. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 18: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "All of you are
     Guardians." Yunis said: Ruzaiq bin Hukaim wrote
     to Ibn Shihab while I was with him at
     Wadi-al-Qura saying, "Shall I lead the Jumua
     prayer?" Ruzaiq was working on the land (i.e
     farming) and there was a group of Sudanese
     people and some others with him; Ruzaiq was
     then the Governor of Aila. Ibn Shihab wrote (to
     Ruzaiq) ordering him to lead the Jumua prayer
     and telling him that Salim told him that 'Abdullah
     bin 'Umar had said, "I heard Allah's Apostle
     saying, 'All of you are guardians and responsible
     for your wards and the things under your care.
     The Imam (i.e. ruler) is the guardian of his
     subjects and is responsible for them and a man is
     the guardian of his family and is responsible for
     them. A woman is the guardian of her husband's
     house and is responsible for it. A servant is the
     guardian of his master's belongings and is
     responsible for them.' I thought that he also said,
     'A man is the guardian of his father's property
     and is responsible for it. All of you are guardians
     and responsible for your wards and the things
     under your care." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 19: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Anyone of you
     coming for the Jumua prayer should take a bath."


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 20: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The taking of a bath on
     Friday is compulsory for every Muslim who has
     attained the age of puberty." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 21: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said "We are the last (to come
     amongst the nations) but (will be) the foremost
     on the Day of Resurrection. They were given the
     Holy Scripture before us and we were given the
     Quran after them. And this was the day (Friday)
     about which they differed and Allah gave us the
     guidance (for that). So tomorrow (i.e. Saturday)
     is the Jews' (day), and the day after tomorrow
     (i.e. Sunday) is the Christians'." The Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) remained silent (for a while) and then
     said, "It is obligatory for every Muslim that he
     should take a bath once in seven days, when he
     should wash his head and body." 

     Narrated Abu Huraira through different narrators
     that the Prophet said, "It is Allah's right on every
     Muslim that he should take a bath (at least) once
     in seven days." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 22: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Allow women to go
     to the Mosques at night." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 23: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     One of the wives of Umar (bin Al-Khattab) used
     to offer the Fajr and the 'Isha' prayer in
     congregation in the Mosque. She was asked why
     she had come out for the prayer as she knew that
     Umar disliked it, and he has great ghaira
     (self-respect). She replied, "What prevents him
     from stopping me from this act?" The other
     replied, "The statement of Allah's Apostle
     (p.b.u.h) : 'Do not stop Allah's women-slave
     from going to Allah s Mosques' prevents him." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 24: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin: 

     On a rainy day Ibn Abbas said to his
     Muadh-dhin, "After saying, 'Ash-hadu anna
     Muhammadan Rasulullah' (I testify that
     Muhammad is Allah's Apostle), do not say
     'Haiya 'Alas-Salat' (come for the prayer) but say
     'Pray in your houses'." (The man did so). But the
     people disliked it. Ibn Abbas said, "It was done
     by one who was much better than I (i.e. the
     Prophet (p.b.u.h) ). No doubt, the Jumua prayer
     is compulsory but I dislike to put you to task by
     bringing you out walking in mud and slush." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 25: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) The people used to
     come from their abodes and from Al-'Awali (i.e.
     outskirts of Medina up to a distance of four miles
     or more from Medina). They used to pass
     through dust and used to be drenched with sweat
     and covered with dust; so sweat used to trickle
     from them. One of them came to Allah's Apostle
     who was in my house. The Prophet said to him,
     "I wish that you keep yourself clean on this day
     of yours (i.e. take a bath)." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 26: 

     Narrated Yahya bin Said: 

     I asked 'Amra about taking a bath on Fridays.
     She replied, " Aisha said, 'The people used to
     work (for their livelihood) and whenever they
     went for the Jumua prayer, they used to go to the
     mosque in the same shape as they had been in
     work. So they were asked to take a bath on
     Friday.' " 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 27: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet used to offer the Jumua prayer
     immediately after mid-day. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 28: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     We used to offer the Jumua prayer early and
     then have an afternoon nap. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 29: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet used to offer the prayer earlier if it
     was very cold; and if it was very hot he used to
     delay the prayer, i.e. the Jumua prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 30: 

     Narrated Abu 'Abs: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Anyone whose feet
     are covered with dust in Allah's cause, shall be
     saved by Allah from the Hell-Fire." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 31: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     heard Allah's Apostles (p.b.u.h) saying, "If the
     prayer is started do not run for it but just walk
     for it calmly and pray whatever you get, and
     complete whatever is missed. " 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 32: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada on the
     authority of his father: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Do not stand up (for
     prayer) unless you see me, and observe calmness
     and solemnity". 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 33: 

     Narrated Salman Al-Farsi: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Anyone who
     takes a bath on Friday and cleans himself as
     much as he can and puts oil (on his hair) or
     scents himself; and then proceeds for the prayer
     and does not force his way between two persons
     (assembled in the mosque for the Friday prayer),
     and prays as much as is written for him and
     remains quiet when the Imam delivers the
     Khutba, all his sins in between the present and
     the last Friday will be forgiven." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 34: 

     Narrated Ibn Juraij: 

     I heard Nazi' saying, "Ibn Umar, said, 'The
     Prophet forbade that a man should make another
     man to get up to sit in his place' ". I said to Nafi',
     'Is it for Jumua prayer only?' He replied, "For
     Jumua prayer and any other (prayer)." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 35: 

     Narrated As-Saib bin Yazid: 

     In the life-time of the Prophet, Abu Bakr and
     Umar, the Adhan for the Jumua prayer used to
     be pronounced when the Imam sat on the pulpit.
     But during the Caliphate of 'Uthman when the
     Muslims increased in number, a third Adhan at
     Az-Zaura' was added. Abu 'Abdullah said,
     "Az-Zaura' is a place in the market of Medina." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 36: 

     Narrated As-Saib bin Yazid: 

     The person who increased the number of Adhans
     for the Jumua prayers to three was Uthman bin
     Affan and it was when the number of the
     (Muslim) people of Medina had increased. In the
     life-time of the Prophet I there was only one
     Muadh-dhin and the Adhan used to be
     pronounced only after the Imam had taken his
     seat (i.e. on the pulpit). 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 37: 

     Narrated Abu Umama bin Sahl bin Hunaif: 

     I heard Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan (repeating the
     statements of the Adhan) while he was sitting on
     the pulpit. When the Muadh-dhin pronounced
     the Adhan saying, "Allahu-Akbar, Allahu
     Akbar", Muawiya said: "Allah Akbar, Allahu
     Akbar." And when the Muadh-dhin said,
     "Ash-hadu an la ilaha illal-lah (I testify that none
     has the right to be worshipped but Allah)",
     Muawiya said, "And (so do) I". When he said,
     "Ash-hadu anna Muhammadan Rasulullah" (I
     testify that Muhammad is Allah's Apostle),
     Muawiya said, "And (so do) I". When the Adhan
     was finished, Muawiya said, "O people, when
     the Muadh-dhin pronounced the Adhan I heard
     Allah's Apostle on this very pulpit saying what
     you have just heard me saying". 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 38: 

     Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid I : 

     'Uthman bin 'Affan introduced the second Adhan
     on Fridays when the number of the people in the
     mosque increased. Previously the Adhan on
     Fridays used to be pronounced only after the
     Imam had taken his seat (on the pulpit). 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 39: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: 

     I heard As-Saib bin Yazid, saying, "In the
     life-time of Allah's Apostle, and Abu Bakr and
     Umar, the Adhan for the Jumua prayer used to
     be pronounced after the Imam had taken his seat
     on the pulpit. But when the people increased in
     number during the caliphate of 'Uthman, he
     introduced a third Adhan (on Friday for the
     Jumua prayer) and it was pronounced at
     Az-Zaura' and that new state of affairs remained
     so in the succeeding years. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 40: 

     Narrated Abu Hazim bin Dinar: 

     Some people went to Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi and
     told him that they had different opinions regarding
     the wood of the pulpit. They asked him about it
     and he said, "By Allah, I know of what wood the
     pulpit was made, and no doubt I saw it on thy
     very first day when Allah's Apostle I took his
     seat on it. Allah's Apostle sent for such and such
     an Ansari woman (and Sahl mentioned her name)
     and said to her, 'Order your slave-carpenter to
     prepare for me some pieces of wood (i.e. pulpit)
     on which I may sit at the time of addressing the
     people.' So she ordered her slave-carpenter and
     he made it from the tamarisk of the forest and
     brought it (to the woman). The woman sent that
     (pulpit) to Allah's Apostle who ordered it to be
     placed here. Then I saw Allah's Apostle praying
     on it and then bowed on it. Then he stepped
     back, got down and prostrated on the ground
     near the foot of the pulpit and again ascended the
     pulpit. After finishing the prayer he faced the
     people and said, 'I have done this so that you
     may follow me and learn the way I pray.' " 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 41: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet used to stand by a stem of a
     date-palm tree (while delivering a sermon).
     When the pulpit was placed for him we heard
     that stem crying like a pregnant she-camel till the
     Prophet got down from the pulpit and placed his
     hand over it. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 42: 

     Narrated Salim: 

     My father said , "I heard the Prophet delivering
     the Khutba on the pulpit and he said, 'Whoever
     comes for the Jumua prayer should take a bath
     (before coming).' " 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 43: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to deliver the Khutba
     while standing and then he would sit, then stand
     again as you do now-a-days. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 44: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     One day the Prophet sat on the pulpit and we sat
     around him. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 45: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Taghlib: 

     Some property or something was brought to
     Allah's Apostle and he distributed it. He gave to
     some men and ignored the others. Later he got
     the news of his being admonished by those
     whom he had ignored. So he glorified and
     praised Allah and said, "Amma ba'du. By Allah, I
     may give to a man and ignore another, although
     the one whom I ignore is more beloved to me
     than the one whom I give. But I give to some
     people as I feel that they have no patience and
     no contentment in their hearts and I leave those
     who are patient and self-contented with the
     goodness and wealth which Allah has put into
     their hearts and 'Amr bin Taghlib is one of them."
     Amr added, By Allah! Those words of Allah's
     Apostle are more beloved to me than the best
     red camels. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 46: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Once in the middle of the night Allah's Apostle
     (p.b.u.h) went out and prayed in the mosque and
     some men prayed with him. The next morning the
     people spoke about it and so more people
     gathered and prayed with him (in the second
     night). They circulated the news in the morning,
     and so, on the third night the number of people
     increased greatly. Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) came
     out and they prayed behind him. On the fourth
     night the mosque was overwhelmed by the
     people till it could not accommodate them.
     Allah's Apostle came out only for the Fajr prayer
     and when he finished the prayer, he faced the
     people and recited "Tashah-hud" (I testify that
     none has the right to be worshipped but Allah
     and that Muhammad is His Apostle), and then
     said, "Amma ba'du. Verily your presence (in the
     mosque at night) was not hidden from me, but I
     was afraid that this prayer (Prayer of Tahajjud)
     might be made compulsory and you might not be
     able to carry it out." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 47: 

     Narrated Abu Hummaid As-Sa'idi 

     One night Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) stood up
     after the prayer and recited "Tashah-hud" and
     then praised Allah as He deserved and said,
     "Amma ba'du." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 48: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama: 

     Once Allah's Apostle got up for delivering the
     Khutba and I heard him after "Tashah-hud"
     saying "Amma ba'du." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 49: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Once the Prophet ascended the pulpit and it was
     the last gathering in which he took part. He was
     covering his shoulder with a big cloak and
     binding his head with an oily bandage. He
     glorified and praised Allah and said, "O people!
     Come to me." So the people came and gathered
     around him and he then said, "Amma ba'du."
     "From now onward the Ansar will decrease and
     other people will increase. So anybody who
     becomes a ruler of the followers of Muhammad
     and has the power to harm or benefit people then
     he should accept the good from the benevolent
     amongst them (Ansar) and overlook the faults of
     their wrong-doers." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 50: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet used to deliver two Khutbas and sit
     in between them 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 51: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "When it is a Friday, the
     angels stand at the gate of the mosque and keep
     on writing the names of the persons coming to
     the mosque in succession according to their
     arrivals. The example of the one who enters the
     mosque in the earliest hour is that of one offering
     a camel (in sacrifice). The one coming next is like
     one offering a cow and then a ram and then a
     chicken and then an egg respectively. When the
     Imam comes out (for Jumua prayer) they (i.e.
     angels) fold their papers and listen to the
     Khutba." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 52: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     A person entered the mosque while the Prophet
     was delivering the Khutba on a Friday. The
     Prophet said to him, "Have you prayed?" The
     man replied in the negative. The Prophet said,
     "Get up and pray two Rakat." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 53: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     A man entered the Mosque while the Prophet
     was delivering the Khutba. The Prophet said to
     him, "Have you prayed?" The man replied in the
     negative. The Prophet said, "Pray two Rakat." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 54: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     While the Prophet was delivering the Khutba on
     a Friday, a man stood up and said, "O, Allah's
     Apostle! The livestock and the sheep are dying,
     so pray to Allah for rain." So he (the Prophet)
     raised both his hands and invoked Allah (for it). 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 55: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once in the lifetime of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) the
     people were afflicted with drought (famine).
     While the Prophet was delivering the Khutba on
     a Friday, a Bedouin stood up and said, "O,
     Allah's Apostle! Our possessions are being
     destroyed and the children are hungry; Please
     invoke Allah (for rain)". So the Prophet raised his
     hands. At that time there was not a trace of cloud
     in the sky. By Him in Whose Hands my soul is as
     soon as he lowered his hands, clouds gathered
     like mountains, and before he got down from the
     pulpit, I saw the rain falling on the beard of the
     Prophet. It rained that day, the next day, the third
     day, the fourth day till the next Friday. The same
     Bedouin or another man stood up and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! The houses have collapsed, our
     possessions and livestock have been drowned;
     Please invoke Allah (to protect us)". So the
     Prophet I raised both his hands and said, "O
     Allah! Round about us and not on us". So, in
     whatever direction he pointed with his hands, the
     clouds dispersed and cleared away, and
     Medina's (sky) became clear as a hole in
     between the clouds. The valley of Qanat
     remained flooded, for one month, none came
     from outside but talked about the abundant rain. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 56: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "When the Imam
     is delivering the Khutba, and you ask your
     companion to keep quiet and listen, then no
     doubt you have done an evil act." 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 57: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) talked about Friday and
     said, "There is an hour (opportune time) on
     Friday and if a Muslim gets it while praying and
     asks something from Allah, then Allah will
     definitely meet his demand." And he (the
     Prophet) pointed out the shortness of that time
     with his hands. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 58: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     While we were praying (Jumua Khutba &
     prayer) with the Prophet (p.b.u.h), some camels
     loaded with food, arrived (from Sham.~ The
     people diverted their attention towards the
     camels (and left the mosque), and only twelve
     persons remained with the Prophet. So this verse
     was revealed: "But when they see Some bargain
     or some amusement, They disperse headlong to
     it, And leave you standing." (62.11) 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 59: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle used to pray two Rakat before
     the Zuhr prayer and two Rakat after it. He also
     used to pray two Rakat after the Maghrib prayer
     in his house, and two Rakat after the 'Isha'
     prayer. He never prayed after Jumua prayer till
     he departed (from the Mosque), and then he
     would pray two Rakat at home. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 60: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     There was a woman amongst us who had a farm
     and she used to sow Silq (a kind of vegetable)
     on the edges of streams in her farm. On Fridays
     she used to pull out the Silq from its roots and
     put the roots in a utensil. Then she would put a
     handful of powdered barley over it and cook it.
     The roots of the Silq were a substitute for meat.
     After finishing the Jumua prayer we used to greet
     her and she would give us that food which we
     would eat with our hands, and because of that
     meal, we used to look forward to Friday. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 61: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     As above with the addition: We never had an
     afternoon nap nor meals except after offering the
     Jumua prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 62: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     We used to offer the Jumua prayer early and
     then have the afternoon nap. 


Volume 2, Book 13, Number 63: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     We used to offer the Jumua prayer with the
     Prophet and then take the afternoon nap. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 14: 

             Fear Prayer 



Volume 2, Book 14, Number 64: 

     Narrated Shu'aib: 

     I asked Az-Zuhri, "Did the Prophet ever offer the
     Fear Prayer?" Az-Zuhri said, "I was told by
     Salim that 'Abdullah bin Umar I had said, 'I took
     part in a holy battle with Allah's Apostle I in
     Najd. We faced the enemy and arranged
     ourselves in rows. Then Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h)
     stood up to lead the prayer and one party stood
     to pray with him while the other faced the enemy.
     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) and the former party
     bowed and performed two prostrations. Then
     that party left and took the place of those who
     had not prayed. Allah's Apostle prayed one
     Raka (with the latter) and performed two
     prostrations and finished his prayer with Taslim.
     Then everyone of them bowed once and
     performed two prostrations individually.' " 


Volume 2, Book 14, Number 65: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Ibn Umar said something similar to Mujahid's
     saying: Whenever (Muslims and non-Muslims)
     stand face to face in battle, the Muslims can pray
     while standing. Ibn Umar added, "The Prophet
     said, 'If the number of the enemy is greater than
     the Muslims, they can pray while standing or
     riding (individually).' " 


Volume 2, Book 14, Number 66: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Once the Prophet (p.b.u.h) led the fear prayer
     and the people stood behind him. He said Takbir
     (Allahu-Akbar) and the people said the same.
     He bowed and some of them bowed. Then he
     prostrated and they also prostrated. Then he
     stood for the second Raka and those who had
     prayed the first Raka left and guarded their
     brothers. The second party joined him and
     performed bowing and prostration with him. All
     the people were in prayer but they were guarding
     one another during the prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 14, Number 67: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     On the day of the Khandaq Umar came, cursing
     the disbelievers of Quraish and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I have not offered the 'Asr prayer and
     the sun has set." The Prophet replied, "By Allah!
     I too, have not offered the prayer yet. "The
     Prophet then went to Buthan, performed ablution
     and performed the 'Asr prayer after the sun had
     set and then offered the Maghrib prayer after it." 


Volume 2, Book 14, Number 68: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) offered the Fajr prayer
     when it was still dark, then he rode and said,
     'Allah Akbar! Khaibar is ruined. When we
     approach near to a nation, the most unfortunate
     is the morning of those who have been warned."
     The people came out into the streets saying,
     "Muhammad and his army." Allah's Apostle
     vanquished them by force and their warriors
     were killed; the children and women were taken
     as captives. Safiya was taken by Dihya Al-Kalbi
     and later she belonged to Allah's Apostle go who
     married her and her Mahr was her manumission. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 15: 

   The Two Festivals (Eids) 



Volume 2, Book 15, Number 69: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Umar bought a silk cloak from the market, took
     it to Allah's Apostle and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Take it and adorn yourself with it during
     the 'Id and when the delegations visit you."
     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) replied, "This dress is
     for those who have no share (in the Hereafter)."
     After a long period Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) sent
     to Umar a cloak of silk brocade. Umar came to
     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) with the cloak and said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! You said that this dress was
     for those who had no share (in the Hereafter);
     yet you have sent me this cloak." Allah's Apostle
     said to him, "Sell it and fulfill your needs by it." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 70: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) came to my house while
     two girls were singing beside me the songs of
     Buath (a story about the war between the two
     tribes of the Ansar, the Khazraj and the Aus,
     before Islam). The Prophet (p.b.u.h) lay down
     and turned his face to the other side. Then Abu
     Bakr came and spoke to me harshly saying,
     "Musical instruments of Satan near the Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) ?" Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) turned his
     face towards him and said, "Leave them." When
     Abu Bakr became inattentive, I signalled to those
     girls to go out and they left. It was the day of 'Id,
     and the Black people were playing with shields
     and spears; so either I requested the Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) or he asked me whether I would like to
     see the display. I replied in the affirmative. Then
     the Prophet (p.b.u.h) made me stand behind him
     and my cheek was touching his cheek and he
     was saying, "Carry on! O Bani Arfida," till I got
     tired. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) asked me, "Are you
     satisfied (Is that sufficient for you)?" I replied in
     the affirmative and he told me to leave. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 71: 

     Narrated Al-Bara': 

     I heard the Prophet (p.b.u.h) delivering a Khutba
     saying, "The first thing to be done on this day
     (first day of 'Id ul Adha) is to pray; and after
     returning from the prayer we slaughter our
     sacrifices (in the name of Allah) and whoever
     does so, he acted according to our Sunna
     (traditions)." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 72: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Abu Bakr came to my house while two small
     Ansari girls were singing beside me the stories of
     the Ansar concerning the Day of Buath. And they
     were not singers. Abu Bakr said protestingly,
     "Musical instruments of Satan in the house of
     Allah's Apostle !" It happened on the 'Id day and
     Allah's Apostle said, "O Abu Bakr! There is an
     'Id for every nation and this is our 'Id." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 73: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik,: 

     Allah's Apostle never proceeded (for the prayer)
     on the Day of 'Id-ul-Fitr unless he had eaten
     some dates. Anas also narrated: The Prophet
     used to eat odd number of dates. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 74: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever slaughtered (his
     sacrifice) before the 'Id prayer, should slaughter
     again." A man stood up and said, "This is the day
     on which one has desire for meat," and he
     mentioned something about his neighbors. It
     seemed that the Prophet I believed him. Then the
     same man added, "I have a young she-goat
     which is dearer to me than the meat of two
     sheep." The Prophet permitted him to slaughter it
     as a sacrifice. I do not know whether that
     permission was valid only for him or for others as
     well. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 75: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     The Prophet delivered the Khutba after offering
     the prayer on the Day of Nahr and said,
     "Whoever offers the prayer like us and slaughters
     like us then his Nusuk (sacrifice) will be accepted
     by Allah. And whoever slaughters his sacrifice
     before the 'Id prayer then he has not done the
     sacrifice." Abi Burda bin Niyar, the uncle of
     Al-Bara' said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have
     slaughtered my sheep before the 'Id prayer and I
     thought today as a day of eating and drinking
     (not alcoholic drinks), and I liked that my sheep
     should be the first to be slaughtered in my house.
     So slaughtered my sheep and took my food
     before coming for the prayer." The Prophet said,
     "The sheep which you have slaughtered is just
     mutton (not a Nusuk)." He (Abu Burda) said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I have a young she-goat which is
     dearer to me than two sheep. Will that be
     sufficient as a Nusuk on my behalf? "The Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) said, "Yes, it will be sufficient for you
     but it will not be sufficient (as a Nusuk) for
     anyone else after you." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 76: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet used to proceed to the Musalla on
     the days of Id-ul-Fitr and Id-ul-Adha; the first
     thing to begin with was the prayer and after that
     he would stand in front of the people and the
     people would keep sitting in their rows. Then he
     would preach to them, advise them and give
     them orders, (i.e. Khutba). And after that if he
     wished to send an army for an expedition, he
     would do so; or if he wanted to give and order,
     he would do so, and then depart. The people
     followed this tradition till I went out with
     Marwan, the Governor of Medina, for the prayer
     of Id-ul-Adha or Id-ul-Fitr. 

     When we reached the Musalla, there was a
     pulpit made by Kathir bin As-Salt. Marwan
     wanted to get up on that pulpit before the prayer.
     I got hold of his clothes but he pulled them and
     ascended the pulpit and delivered the Khutba
     before the prayer. I said to him, "By Allah, you
     have changed (the Prophet's tradition)." He
     replied, "O Abu Sa'id! Gone is that which you
     know." I said, "By Allah! What I know is better
     than what I do not know." Marwan said, "People
     do not sit to listen to our Khutba after the prayer,
     so I delivered the Khutba before the prayer." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 77: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle used to offer the prayer of
     'Id-ul-Adha and 'Id-ul-Fitr and then deliver the
     Khutba after the prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 78: 

     Narrated Ibn Juraij: 

     'Ata' said, "Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, 'The Prophet
     went out on the Day of 'Id-ul-Fitr and offered the
     prayer before delivering the Khutba, Ata told me
     that during the early days of IbnAz-Zubair, Ibn
     Abbas had sent a message to him telling him that
     the Adhan for the 'Id Prayer was never
     pronounced (in the life time of Allah's Apostle)
     and the Khutba used to be delivered after the
     prayer. Ata told me that Ibn Abbas and Jabir bin
     'Abdullah, had said, ú- where was no Adhan for
     the prayer of '7d-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Aqha." 'At a'
     said, "I heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, 'The
     Prophet stood up and started with the prayer,
     and after it he delivered the Khutba. When the
     Prophet of Allah (p.b.u.h) finished (the Khutba),
     he went to the women and preached to them,
     while he was leaning on Bilal's hand. Bilal was
     spreading his garment and the ladies were putting
     alms in it.' " I said to Ata, "Do you think it
     incumbent upon an Imam to go to the women
     and preach to them after finishing the prayer and
     Khutba?" 'Ata' said, "No doubt it is incumbent
     on Imams to do so, and why should they not do
     so?" 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 79: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     I offered the 'Id prayer with Allah's Apostle, Abu
     Bakr, Umar and 'Uthman and all of them offered
     the prayer before delivering the Khutba. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 80: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle, Abu Bakr and Umar! used to
     offer the two 'Id prayers before delivering the
     Khutba. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 81: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet offered a two Rakat prayer on the
     Day of Id ul Fitr and he did not pray before or
     after it. Then he went towards women along with
     Bilal and ordered them to pay alms and so they
     started giving their earrings and necklaces (in
     charity). 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 82: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "The first thing that
     we should do on this day of ours is to pray and
     then return to slaughter the sacrifice. So anyone
     who does so, he acted according to our Sunna
     (tradition), and whoever slaughtered the sacrifice
     before the prayer, it was just meat which he
     presented to his family and would not be
     considered as Nusuk." A person from the Ansar
     named Abu Burda bin Niyyar said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I slaughtered the Nusuk (before the
     prayer) but I have a young she-goat which is
     better than an older sheep." The Prophet I said,
     "Sacrifice it in lieu of the first, but it will be not
     sufficient (as a sacrifice) for anybody else after
     you." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 83: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     I was with Ibn Umar when a spear head pierced
     the sole of his foot and his foot stuck to the
     paddle of the saddle and I got down and pulled
     his foot out, and that happened in Mina.
     Al-Hajjaj got the news and came to enquire
     about his health and said, "Alas! If we could only
     know the man who wounded you!" Ibn Umar
     said, "You are the one who wounded me."
     Al-Hajjaj said, "How is that?" Ibn Umar said,
     "You have allowed the arms to be carried on a
     day on which nobody used to carry them and
     you allowed arms to be carried in the Haram
     even though it was not allowed before." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 84: 

     Narrated Said bin 'Amr bin Said bin Al-'Aas: 

     Al-Hajjaj went to Ibn Umar while I was present
     there. Al-Hajjaj asked Ibn Umar, "How are
     you?" Ibn Umar replied, "I am all right,"
     Al-Hajjaj asked, "Who wounded you?" Ibn
     Umar replied, "The person who allowed arms to
     be carried on the day on which it was forbidden
     to carry them (he meant Al-Hajjaj)" 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 85: 

     Narrated Al-Bara': 

     The Prophet delivered the Khutba on the day of
     Nahr ('Id-ul-Adha) and said, "The first thing we
     should do on this day of ours is to pray and then
     return and slaughter (our sacrifices). So anyone
     who does so he acted according to our Sunna;
     and whoever slaughtered before the prayer then
     it was just meat that he offered to his family and
     would not be considered as a sacrifice in any
     way. My uncle Abu Burda bin Niyyar got up and
     said, "O, Allah's Apostle! I slaughtered the
     sacrifice before the prayer but I have a young
     she-goat which is better than an older sheep."
     The Prophet said, "Slaughter it in lieu of the first
     and such a goat will not be considered as a
     sacrifice for anybody else after you." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 86: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "No good deeds done on
     other days are superior to those done on these
     (first ten days of Dhul Hijja)." Then some
     companions of the Prophet said, "Not even
     Jihad?" He replied, "Not even Jihad, except that
     of a man who does it by putting himself and his
     property in danger (for Allah's sake) and does
     not return with any of those things." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 87: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Abi Bakr Al-Thaqafi: 

     While we were going from Mina to 'Arafat, I
     asked Anas bin Malik, about Talbiya, "How did
     you use to say Talbiya in the company of the
     Prophet?" Anas said: "People used to say
     Talbiya and their saying was not objected to and
     they used to say Takbir and that was not
     objected to either. " 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 88: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiya: 

     We used to be ordered to come out on the Day
     of 'Id and even bring out the virgin girls from their
     houses and menstruating women so that they
     might stand behind the men and say Takbir along
     with them and invoke Allah along with them and
     hope for the blessings of that day and for
     purification from sins. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 89: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: On the day of 'Id-ul-Fitr and
     'Id-ul-Adha a spear used to be planted in front of
     the Prophet I (as a Sutra for the prayer) and then
     he would pray. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 90: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet used to proceed to the Musalla and
     an 'Anaza used to be carried before him and
     planted in the Musalla in front of him and he
     would pray facing it (as a Sutra). 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 91: 

     Narrated Muhammad: 

     Um 'Atiyya said: "Our Prophet ordered us to
     come out (on 'Id day) with the mature girls and
     the virgins staying in seclusion." Hafsa narrated
     the above mentioned Hadith and added, "The
     mature girls or virgins staying in seclusion but the
     menstruating women had to keep away from the
     Musalla." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 92: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     I (in my boyhood) went out with the Prophet on
     the day of 'Id ul Fitr or Id-ul-Adha. The Prophet
     prayed and then delivered the Khutba and then
     went towards the women, preached and advised
     them and ordered them to give alms. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 93: 

     Narrated Al-Bara': 

     The Prophet went towards Al-Baqi (the
     grave-yard at Medina) on the day of Id-ul-Adha
     and offered a two-Rakat prayer (of 'Id-ul-Adha)
     and then faced us and said, "On this day of ours,
     our first act of worship is the offering of prayer
     and then we will return and slaughter the
     sacrifice, and whoever does this concords with
     our Sunna; and whoever slaughtered his sacrifice
     before that (i.e. before the prayer) then that was
     a thing which he prepared earlier for his family
     and it would not be considered as a Nusuk
     (sacrifice.)" A man stood up and said, "O, Allah's
     Apostle! I slaughtered (the animal before the
     prayer) but I have a young she-goat which is
     better than an older sheep." The Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) said to him, "Slaughter it. But a similar
     sacrifice will not be sufficient for anybody else
     after you." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 94: 

     Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Abis: 

     Ibn Abbas was asked whether he had joined the
     Prophet in the 'Id prayer. He said, "Yes. And I
     could not have joined him had I not been young.
     (The Prophet came out) till he reached the mark
     which was near the house of Kathir bin As-Salt,
     offered the prayer, delivered the Khutba and
     then went towards the women. Bilal was
     accompanying him. He preached to them and
     advised them and ordered them to give alms. I
     saw the women putting their ornaments with their
     outstretched hands into Bilal's garment. Then the
     Prophet along with Bilal returned home. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 95: 

     Narrated Ibn Juraij: 

     'Ata' told me that he had heard Jabir bin
     'Abdullah saying, "The Prophet stood up to offer
     the prayer of the 'Id ul Fitr. He first offered the
     prayer and then delivered the Khutba. After
     finishing it he got down (from the pulpit) and
     went towards the women and advised them while
     he was leaning on Bilal's hand. Bilal was
     spreading out his garment where the women
     were putting their alms." I asked 'Ata' whether it
     was the Zakat of 'Id ul Fitr. He said, "No, it was
     just alms given at that time. Some lady put her
     finger ring and the others would do the same." I
     said, (to 'Ata'), "Do you think that it is incumbent
     upon the Imam to give advice to the women (on
     'Id day)?" He said, "No doubt, it is incumbent
     upon the Imams to do so and why should they
     not do so?" Al-Hasan bin Muslim told me that
     Ibn Abbas had said, "I join the Prophet, Abu
     Bakr, Umar and 'Uthman in the 'Id ul Fitr
     prayers. They used to offer the prayer before the
     Khutba and then they used to deliver the Khutba
     afterwards. Once the Prophet I came out (for the
     'Id prayer) as if I were just observing him waving
     to the people to sit down. He, then accompanied
     by Bilal, came crossing the rows till he reached
     the women. He recited the following verse: 'O
     Prophet! When the believing women come to
     you to take the oath of fealty to you . . . (to the
     end of the verse) (60.12).' After finishing the
     recitation he said, "O ladies! Are you fulfilling
     your covenant?" None except one woman said,
     "Yes." Hasan did not know who was that
     woman. The Prophet said, "Then give alms." Bilal
     spread his garment and said, "Keep on giving
     alms. Let my father and mother sacrifice their
     lives for you (ladies)." So the ladies kept on
     putting their Fatkhs (big rings) and other kinds of
     rings in Bilal's garment." Abdur-Razaq said, "
     'Fatkhs' is a big ring which used to be worn in the
     (Pre-lslamic) period of ignorance. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 96: 

     Narrated Aiyub: 

     Hafsa bint Sirin said, "On Id we used to forbid
     our girls to go out for 'Id prayer. A lady came
     and stayed at the palace of Bani Khalaf and I
     went to her. She said, 'The husband of my sister
     took part in twelve holy battles along with the
     Prophet and my sister was with her husband in
     six of them. My sister said that they used to nurse
     the sick and treat the wounded. Once she asked,
     'O Allah's Apostle! If a woman has no veil, is
     there any harm if she does not come out (on 'Id
     day)?' The Prophet said, 'Her companion should
     let her share her veil with her, and the women
     should participate in the good deeds and in the
     religious gatherings of the believers.' " Hafsa
     added, "When Um-'Atiya came, I went to her
     and asked her, 'Did you hear anything about
     so-and-so?' Um-'Atlya said, 'Yes, let my father
     be sacrificed for the Prophet (p.b.u.h). (And
     whenever she mentioned the name of the Prophet
     she always used to say, 'Let my father be'
     sacrificed for him). He said, 'Virgin mature girls
     staying often screened (or said, 'Mature girls and
     virgins staying often screened--Aiyub is not sure
     as which was right) and menstruating women
     should come out (on the 'Id day). But the
     menstruating women should keep away from the
     Musalla. And all the women should participate in
     the good deeds and in the religious gatherings of
     the believers'." Hafsa said, "On that I said to
     Um-'Atiya, 'Also those who are menstruating?' "
     Um-'Atiya replied, "Yes. Do they not present
     themselves at 'Arafat and elsewhere?". 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 97: 

     Narrated Um-'Atiya: 

     We were ordered to go out (for 'Id) and also to
     take along with us the menstruating women,
     mature girls and virgins staying in seclusion. (Ibn
     'Aun said, "Or mature virgins staying in
     seclusion)." The menstruating women could
     present themselves at the religious gathering and
     invocation of Muslims but should keep away
     from their Musalla. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 98: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to Nahr or slaughter
     sacrifices at the Musalla (on 'Id-ul-Adha). 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 99: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     On the day of Nahr Allah's Apostle delivered the
     Khutba after the 'Id prayer and said, "Anyone
     who prayed like us and slaughtered the sacrifice
     like we did then he acted according to our
     (Nusuk) tradition of sacrificing, and whoever
     slaughtered the sacrifice before the prayer, then
     that was just mutton (i.e. not sacrifice)." Abu
     Burda bin Naiyar stood up and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! By Allah, I slaughtered my sacrifice
     before I offered the (Id) prayer and thought that
     today was the day of eating and drinking
     (non-alcoholic drinks) and so I made haste (in
     slaughtering) and ate and also fed my family and
     neighbors." Allah's Apostle said, "That was just
     mutton (not a sacrifice)." Then Abu Burda said,
     "I have a young she-goat and no doubt, it is
     better than two sheep. Will that be sufficient as a
     sacrifice for me?" The Prophet replied, "Yes. But
     it will not be sufficient for anyone else (as a
     sacrifice), after you." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 100: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle .~ offered the prayer on the day
     of Nahr and then delivered the Khutba and
     ordered that whoever had slaughtered his
     sacrifice before the prayer should repeat it, that
     is, should slaughter another sacrifice. Then a
     person from the Ansar stood up and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! because of my neighbors (he
     described them as being very needy or poor) I
     slaughtered before the prayer. I have a young
     she-goat which, in my opinion, is better than two
     sheep." The Prophet gave him the permission for
     slaughtering it as a sacrifice. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 101: 

     Narrated Jundab: 

     On the day of Nahr the Prophet offered the
     prayer and delivered the Khutba and then
     slaughtered the sacrifice and said, "Anybody who
     slaughtered (his sacrifice) before the prayer
     should slaughter another animal in lieu of it, and
     the one who has not yet slaughtered should
     slaughter the sacrifice mentioning Allah's name on
     it." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 102: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     On the Day of 'Id the Prophet used to return
     (after offering the 'Id prayer) through a way
     different from that by which he went. 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 103: 

     Narrated 'Urwa on the authority of 'Aisha: 

     On the days of Mina, (11th, 12th, and 13th of
     Dhul-Hijjah) Abu Bakr came to her while two
     young girls were beating the tambourine and the
     Prophet was lying covered with his clothes. Abu
     Bakr scolded them and the Prophet uncovered
     his face and said to Abu Bakr, "Leave them, for
     these days are the days of 'Id and the days of
     Mina." 'Aisha further said, "Once the Prophet
     was screening me and I was watching the display
     of black slaves in the Mosque and ('Umar)
     scolded them. The Prophet said, 'Leave them. O
     Bani Arfida! (carry on), you are safe
     (protected)'." 


Volume 2, Book 15, Number 104: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet went out and offered a two Rakat
     prayer on the Day of 'Id ul Fitr and did not offer
     any other prayer before or after it and at that
     time Bilal was accompanying him. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 16: 

              Witr Prayer 



Volume 2, Book 16, Number 105: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Once a person asked Allah's Apostle about the
     night prayer. Allah's Apostle replied, "The night
     prayer is offered as two Rakat followed by two
     Rakat and so on and if anyone is afraid of the
     approaching dawn (Fajr prayer) he should pray
     one Raka and this will be a Witr for all the Rakat
     which he has prayed before." Nafi' told that
     'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to say Taslim between
     (the first) two Rakat and (the third) odd one in
     the Witr prayer, when he wanted to attend to a
     certain matter (during that interval between the
     Rakat). 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 106: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once I passed the night in the house of Maimuna
     (his aunt). I slept across the bed while Allah's
     Apostle and his wife slept length-wise. The
     Prophet slept till midnight or nearly so and woke
     up rubbing his face and recited ten verses from
     Surat "Aal-Imran." Allah's Apostle went towards
     a leather skin and performed ablution in the most
     perfect way and then stood for the prayer. I did
     the same and stood beside him. The Prophet put
     his right hand on my head, twisted my ear and
     then prayed two Rakat five times and then ended
     his prayer with Witr. He laid down till the
     Muadh-dhin came then he stood up and offered
     two Rakat (Sunna of Fajr prayer) and then went
     out and offered the Fajr prayer. 

     (See Hadith No. 183, Vol. 1) 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 107: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar : 

     The Prophet said, "Night prayer is offered as two
     Rakat followed by two Rakat and so on, and if
     you want to finish it, pray only one Raka which
     will be Witr for all the previous Rakat."
     Al-Qasim said, "Since we attained the age of
     puberty we have seen some people offering a
     three-Rakat prayer as Witr and all that is
     permissible. I hope there will be no harm in it." 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 108: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to pray eleven Rakat at
     night and that was his night prayer and each of
     his prostrations lasted for a period enough for
     one of you to recite fifty verses before Allah's
     Apostle raised his head. He also used to pray
     two Rakat (Sunna) before the (compulsory) Fajr
     prayer and then lie down on his right side till the
     Muadh-dhin came to him for the prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 109: 

     Narrated Anas bin Sirin: 

     I asked Ibn 'Umar, "What is your opinion about
     the two Rakat before the Fajr (compulsory)
     prayer, as to prolonging the recitation in them?"
     He said, "The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to pray at
     night two Rakat followed by two and so on, and
     end the prayer by one Raka Witr. He used to
     offer two Rakat before the Fajr prayer
     immediately after the Adhan." (Hammad, the
     sub-narrator said, "That meant (that he prayed)
     quickly.)" 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 110: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle offered Witr prayer at different
     nights at various hours extending (from the 'Isha'
     prayer) up to the last hour of the night. 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 111: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to offer his night
     prayer while I was sleeping across in his bed.
     Whenever he intended to offer the Witr prayer,
     he used to wake me up and I would offer the
     Witr prayer too. 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 112: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Make s your last
     prayer at night." 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 113: 

     Narrated Said bin Yasar: 

     I was going to Mecca in the company of
     'Abdullah bin 'Umar and when I apprehended the
     approaching dawn, I dismounted and offered the
     Witr prayer and then joined him. 'Abdullah bin
     'Umar said, "Where have you been?" I replied, "I
     apprehended the approaching dawn so I
     dismounted and prayed the Witr prayer."
     'Abdullah said, "Isn't it sufficient for you to follow
     the good example of Allah's Apostle?" I replied,
     "Yes, by Allah." He said, "Allah's Apostle used
     to pray Witr on the back of the camel (while on a
     journey)." 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 114: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet used to offer (Nawafil) prayers on
     his Rahila (mount) facing its direction by signals,
     but not the compulsory prayer. He also used to
     pray Witr on his (mount) Rahila. 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 115: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin: 

     Anas was asked, "Did the Prophet recite Qunut
     in the Fajr prayer?" Anas replied in the
     affirmative. He was further asked, "Did he recite
     Qunut before bowing?" Anas replied, "He recited
     Qunut after bowing for some time (for one
     month)." 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 116: 

     Narrated 'Asim: 

     I asked Anas bin Malik about the Qunut. Anas
     replied, "Definitely it was (recited)". I asked,
     "Before bowing or after it?" Anas replied,
     "Before bowing." I added, "So and so has told
     me that you had informed him that it had been
     after bowing." Anas said, "He told an untruth (i.e.
     "was mistaken," according to the Hijazi dialect).
     Allah's Apostle recited Qunut after bowing for a
     period of one month." Anas added, "The Prophet
     sent about seventy men (who knew the Quran by
     heart) towards the pagans (of Najd) who were
     less than they in number and there was a peace
     treaty between them and Allah's Apostles (but
     the Pagans broke the treaty and killed the
     seventy men). So Allah's Apostle recited Qunut
     for a period of one month asking Allah to punish
     them." 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 117: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet recited Qunut for one month (in the
     Fajr prayer) asking Allah to punish the tribes of
     Ral and Dhakwan. 


Volume 2, Book 16, Number 118: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Qunut used to be recited in the Maghrib and
     the Fajr prayers. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 17: 

    Invoking Allah for Rain
                (Istisqaa) 



Volume 2, Book 17, Number 119: 

     Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim's uncle: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) went out to offer the
     Istisqa' prayer and turned (and put on) his cloak
     inside out. 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 120: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira; 

     Whenever the Prophet (p.b.u.h) lifted his head
     from the bowing in the last Raka he used to say:
     "O Allah! Save 'Aiyash bin Abi Rabi'a. O Allah!
     Save Salama bin Hisham. O Allah! Save Walid
     bin Walid. O Allah! Save the weak faithful
     believers. O Allah! Be hard on the tribes of
     Mudar and send (famine) years on them like the
     famine years of (Prophet) Joseph ." The Prophet
     further said, "Allah forgive the tribes of Ghifar
     and save the tribes of Aslam." Abu Az-Zinad (a
     sub-narrator) said, "The Qunut used to be
     recited by the Prophet in the Fajr prayer." 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 121: 

     Narrated Masruq: 

     We were with 'Abdullah and he said, "When the
     Prophet saw the refusal of the people to accept
     Islam he said, "O Allah! Send (famine) years on
     them for (seven years) like the seven years (of
     famine during the time) of (Prophet) Joseph." So
     famine overtook them for one year and
     destroyed every kind of life to such an extent that
     the people started eating hides, carcasses and
     rotten dead animals. Whenever one of them
     looked towards the sky, he would (imagine
     himself to) see smoke because of hunger. So
     Abu Sufyan went to the Prophet and said, "O
     Muhammad! You order people to obey Allah
     and to keep good relations with kith and kin. No
     doubt the people of your tribe are dying, so
     please pray to Allah for them." So Allah
     revealed: "Then watch you For the day that The
     sky will bring forth a kind Of smoke Plainly
     visible ... Verily! You will return (to disbelief) On
     the day when We shall seize You with a mighty
     grasp. (44.10-16) Ibn Masud added, "Al-Batsha
     (i.e. grasp) happened in the battle of Badr and no
     doubt smoke, Al-Batsha, Al-Lizam, and the
     verse of Surat Ar-Rum have all passed . 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 122: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar: 

     My father said, "I heard Ibn 'Umar reciting the
     poetic verses of Abu Talib: And a white (person)
     (i.e. the Prophet) who is requested to pray for
     rain and who takes care of the orphans and is the
     guardian of widows." Salim's father (Ibn 'Umar)
     said, "The following poetic verse occurred to my
     mind while I was looking at the face of the
     Prophet (p.b.u.h) while he was praying for rain.
     He did not get down till the rain water flowed
     profusely from every roof-g utter: And a white
     (person) who is requested to pray for rain and
     who takes care of the orphans and is the
     guardian of widows . . . And these were the
     words of Abu Talib." 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 123: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Whenever drought threatened them, 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab, used to ask Al-Abbas bin 'Abdul
     Muttalib to invoke Allah for rain. He used to say,
     "O Allah! We used to ask our Prophet to invoke
     You for rain, and You would bless us with rain,
     and now we ask his uncle to invoke You for rain.
     O Allah ! Bless us with rain."(1) And so it would
     rain. 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 124: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid: 

     The Prophet turned his cloak inside out on
     Istisqa. 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 125: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid 

     The Prophet went towards the Musalla and
     invoked Allah for rain. He faced the Qibla and
     wore his cloak inside out, and offered two
     Rakat. 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 126: 

     Narrated Sharik bin 'Abdullah bin Abi Namir: 

     I heard Anas bin Malik saying, "On a Friday a
     person entered the main Mosque through the
     gate facing the pulpit while Allah's Apostle was
     delivering the Khutba. The man stood in front of
     Allah's Apostle and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! The
     livestock are dying and the roads are cut off; so
     please pray to Allah for rain.' " Anas added,
     "Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) raised both his hands
     and said, 'O Allah! Bless us with rain! O Allah!
     Bless us with rain! O Allah! Bless us with rain!' "
     Anas added, "By Allah, we could not see any
     trace of cloud in the sky and there was no
     building or a house between us and (the
     mountains of) Sila." Anas added, "A heavy cloud
     like a shield appeared from behind it (i.e. Sila'
     Mountain). When it came in the middle of the
     sky, it spread and then rained." Anas further said,
     "By Allah! We could not see the sun for a week.
     Next Friday a person entered through the same
     gate and at that time Allah's Apostle was
     delivering the Friday's Khutba. The man stood in
     front of him and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! The
     livestock are dying and the roads are cut off,
     please pray to Allah to with-hold rain.' " Anas
     added, "Allah's Apostle I raised both his hands
     and said, 'O Allah! Round about us and not on
     us. O Allah! On the plateaus, on the mountains,
     on the hills, in the valleys and on the places
     where trees grow.' So the rain stopped and we
     came out walking in the sun." Sharik asked Anas
     whether it was the same person who had asked
     for the rain (the last Friday). Anas replied that he
     did not know. 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 127: 

     Narrated Sharik: 

     Anas bin Malik said, "A person entered the
     Mosque on a Friday through the gate facing the
     Daril-Qada' and Allah's Apostle was standing
     delivering the Khutba (sermon). The man stood
     in front of Allah's Apostle and said, 'O Allah's
     Apostle, livestock are dying and the roads are
     cut off; please pray to Allah for rain.' So Allah's
     Apostle (p.b.u.h) raised both his hands and said,
     'O Allah! Bless us with rain. O Allah! Bless us
     with rain. O Allah! Bless us with rain!" Anas
     added, "By Allah, there were no clouds in the
     sky and there was no house or building between
     us and the mountain of Silas'. Then a big cloud
     like a shield appeared from behind it (i.e. Silas
     Mountain) and when it came in the middle of the
     sky, it spread and then rained. By Allah! We
     could not see the sun for a week. The next
     Friday, a person entered through the same gate
     and Allah's Apostle was delivering the Friday
     Khutba and the man stood in front of him and
     said, 'O Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying
     and the roads are cut off; Please pray to Allah to
     withhold rain.' " Anas added, "Allah's Apostle
     raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Round
     about us and not on us. O Allah!' On the
     plateaus, on the mountains, on the hills, in the
     valleys and on the places where trees grow.' "
     Anas added, "The rain stopped and we came
     out, walking in the sun." Sharik asked Anas
     whether it was the same person who had asked
     for rain the previous Friday. Anas replied that he
     did not know. 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 128: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     Anas I said, "While Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) was
     delivering the Friday Khutba (sermon) a man
     came and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Rain is
     scarce; please ask Allah to bless us with rain.' So
     he invoked Allah for it, and it rained so much that
     we could hardly reach our homes and it
     continued raining till the next Friday." Anas
     further said, "Then the same or some other
     person stood up and said, 'O Allah's Apostle!
     Invoke Allah to withhold the rain.' On that,
     Allah's Apostle I said, 'O Allah! Round about us
     and not on us.' " Anas added, "I saw the clouds
     dispersing right and left and it continued to rain
     but not over Medina." 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 129: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     A man came to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and said,
     "Livestock are destroyed and the roads are cut
     off." So Allah's Apostle invoked Allah for rain
     and it rained from that Friday till the next Friday.
     The same person came again and said, "Houses
     have collapsed, roads are cut off, and the
     livestock are destroyed. Please pray to Allah to
     withhold the rain." Allah's Apostle (stood up and)
     said, "O Allah! (Let it rain) on the plateaus, on
     the hills, in the valleys and over the places where
     trees grow." So the clouds cleared away from
     Medina as clothes are taken off . 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 130: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Livestock are destroyed and the
     roads are cut off. So please invoke Allah." So
     Allah's Apostle prayed and it rained from that
     Friday to the next Friday. Then he came to
     Allah's Apostle I and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     Houses have collapsed, roads are cut off and the
     livestock are destroyed." So Allah's Apostle
     (p.b.u.h) prayed, "O Allah! (Let it rain) on the
     tops of mountains, on the plateaus, in the valleys
     and over the places where trees grow." So the
     clouds cleared away from Medina as clothes are
     taken off. 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 131: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik 

     I p man complained to the Prophet about the
     destruction of livestock and property and the
     hunger of the offspring. So he invoked (Allah for
     rain. The narrator (Anas) did not mention that the
     Prophet had worn his cloak inside out or faced
     the Qibla. 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 132: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik 

     A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Livestock are destroyed and the
     roads are cut off; so please invoke Allah." So
     Allah's Apostle prayed for rain and it rained from
     that Friday till the next Friday. Then a man came
     to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! The houses have collapsed, roads are
     cut off and the livestock are destroyed." So
     Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah ! (Let it rain) on
     the tops of the mountains, on the plateaus, in the
     valleys and over the places where trees grow."
     So the clouds cleared away from Medina as
     clothes are taken off. 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 133: 

     Narrated Masruq: 

     One day I went to Ibn Masud who said, "When
     Quraish delayed in embracing Islam, the Prophet
     I invoked Allah to curse them, so they were
     afflicted with a (famine) year because of which
     many of them died and they ate the carcasses
     and Abu Sufyan came to the Prophet and said,
     'O Muhammad! You came to order people to
     keep good relation with kith and kin and your
     nation is being destroyed, so invoke Allah I ? So
     the Prophet I recited the Holy verses of
     Sirat-Ad-Dukhan: 'Then watch you For the day
     that The sky will Bring forth a kind Of smoke
     Plainly visible.' (44.10) When the famine was
     taken off, the people renegade once again as
     nonbelievers. The statement of Allah, (in Sura
     "Ad-Dukhan"-44) refers to that: 'On the day
     when We shall seize You with a mighty grasp.'
     (44.16) And that was what happened on the day
     of the battle of Badr." Asbath added on the
     authority of Mansur, "Allah's Apostle prayed for
     them and it rained heavily for seven days. So the
     people complained of the excessive rain. The
     Prophet said, 'O Allah! (Let it rain) around us
     and not on us.' So the clouds dispersed over his
     head and it rained over the surroundings." 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 134: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle I was delivering the Khutba
     (sermon) on a Friday when the people stood up,
     shouted and said, "O Allah's Apostle! There is
     no rain (drought), the trees have dried and the
     livestock are destroyed; Please pray to Allah for
     rain." So Allah's Apostle said twice, "O Allah!
     Bless us with rain." By Allah, there was no trace
     of cloud in the sky and suddenly the sky became
     overcast with clouds and it started raining. The
     Prophet came down the pulpit and offered the
     prayer. When he came back from the prayer (to
     his house) it was raining and it rained
     continuously till the next Friday. When the
     Prophet started delivering the Friday Khutba
     (sermon), the people started shouting and said to
     him, "The houses have collapsed and the roads
     are cut off; so please pray to Allah to withhold
     the rain." So the Prophet smiled and said, "O
     Allah! Round about us and not on us." So the
     sky became clear over Medina but it kept on
     raining over the outskirts (of Medina) and not a
     single drop of rain fell over Median. I looked
     towards the sky which was as bright and clear as
     a crown. 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 135: 

     Narrated Abbas bin Tamim 

     that his uncle (who was one of the companions of
     the Prophet) had told him, "The Prophet went
     out with the people to invoke Allah for rain for
     them. He stood up and invoked Allah for rain,
     then faced the Qibla and turned his cloak (inside
     out) and it rained." 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 136: 

     Narrated Abbas bin Tamim 

     from his uncle who said, "The Prophet went out
     to invoke Allah for rain. He faced the Qibla
     invoking Allah. He turned over his cloak (inside
     out) and then offered two Rakat and recited the
     Quran aloud in them." 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 137: 

     Narrated Abbas bin Tamim from his uncle, 

     "I saw the Prophet on the day when he went out
     to offer the Istisqa' prayer. He turned his back
     towards the people and faced the Qibla and
     asked Allah for rain. Then he turned his cloak
     inside out and led us in a two Rakat prayer and
     recited the Qur'an aloud in them." 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 138: 

     Narrated Abbas bin Tamlm from his uncle who
     said, 

     "The Prophet invoked Allah for rain and offered
     a two Rakat prayer and he put his cloak inside
     out." 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 139: 

     Narrated Abbas bin Tamim from his uncle who
     said, 

     "The Prophet went out to the Musalla to offer the
     Istisqa' prayer, faced the Qibla and offered a
     two-Rakat prayer and turned his cloak inside
     out." Narrated Abu Bakr, "The Prophet put the
     right side of his cloak on his left side." 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 140: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid Al-Ansari: 

     The Prophet went out towards the Musalla in
     order to offer the Istisqa' prayer and when he
     intended to invoke (Allah) or started invoking, he
     faced the Qibla and turned his cloak inside out. 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 141: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik 

     The Prophet never raised his hands for any
     invocation except for that of Istisqa' and he used
     to raise them so much that the whiteness of his
     armpits became visible. (Note: It may be that
     Anas did not see the Prophet raising his hands,
     but it is narrated that the Prophet used to raise
     his hands for invocations other than Istisqa. See
     Hadith No. 807 & 808 and also see Hadith No.
     612, Vol. 5). 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 142: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle saw the rain, he used
     to say, "O Allah! Let it be a strong fruitful rain." 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 143: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     In the life-time of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) the
     people were afflicted with a (famine) year. While
     the Prophet was delivering the Khutba (sermon)
     on the pulpit on a Friday, a Bedouin stood up
     and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The livestock are
     dying and the families (offspring) are hungry:
     please pray to Allah to bless us with rain." Allah's
     Apostle raised both his hands towards the sky
     and at that time there was not a trace of cloud in
     they sky. Then the clouds started gathering like
     mountains. Before he got down from the pulpit I
     saw rain-water trickling down his beard. It rained
     that day, the next day, the third day, the fourth
     day and till the next Friday, when the same
     Bedouin or some other person stood up (during
     the Friday Khutba) and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     The houses have collapsed and the livestock are
     drowned. Please invoke Allah for us." So Allah's
     Apostle raised both his hands and said, "O Allah!
     Around us and not on us." Whichever side the
     Prophet directed his hand, the clouds dispersed
     from there till a hole (in the clouds) was formed
     over Medina. The valley of Qanat remained
     flowing (with water) for one month and none,
     came from outside who didn't talk about the
     abundant rain. 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 144: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Whenever a strong wind blew, anxiety appeared
     on the face of the Prophet (fearing that wind
     might be a sign of Allah's wrath). 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 145: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "I was granted victory with
     As-Saba and the nation of 'Ad was destroyed by
     Ad-Dabur (westerly wind) . 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 146: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The Hour (Last Day) will not
     be established until (religious) knowledge will be
     taken away (by the death of religious learned
     men), earthquakes will be very frequent, time will
     pass quickly, afflictions will appear, murders will
     increase and money will overflow amongst you."
     (See Hadith No. 85 Vol 1). 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 147: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     (The Prophet) said, "O Allah! Bless our Sham
     and our Yemen." People said, "Our Najd as
     well." The Prophet again said, "O Allah! Bless
     our Sham and Yemen." They said again, "Our
     Najd as well." On that the Prophet said, "There
     will appear earthquakes and afflictions, and from
     there will come out the side of the head of
     Satan." 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 148: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani: 

     Allah's Apostle led the morning prayer in
     Al-Hudaibiya and it had rained the previous
     night. When the Prophet (p.b.u.h) had finished
     the prayer he faced the people and said, "Do you
     know what your Lord has said?" They replied,
     "Allah and His Apostle know better." (The
     Prophet said), "Allah says, 'In this morning some
     of My worshipers remained as true believers and
     some became non-believers; he who said that it
     had rained with the blessing and mercy of Allah is
     the one who believes in Me and does not believe
     in star, but he who said it had rained because of
     such and such (star) is a disbeliever in Me and is
     a believer in star.' " 


Volume 2, Book 17, Number 149: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Keys of the
     unseen knowledge are five which nobody knows
     but Allah . . . nobody knows what will happen
     tomorrow; nobody knows what is in the womb;
     nobody knows what he will gain tomorrow;
     nobody knows at what place he will die; and
     nobody knows when it will rain." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 18: 

                 Eclipses 



Volume 2, Book 18, Number 150: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     We were with Allah's Apostle when the sun
     eclipsed. Allah's Apostle stood up dragging his
     cloak till he entered the Mosque. He led us in a
     two-Rakat prayer till the sun (eclipse) had
     cleared. Then the Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "The
     sun and the moon do not eclipse because of
     someone's death. So whenever you see these
     eclipses pray and invoke (Allah) till the eclipse is
     over." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 151: 

     Narrated Abu Masud: 

     The Prophet said, "The sun and the moon do not
     eclipse because of the death of someone from
     the people but they are two signs amongst the
     signs of Allah. When you see them stand up and
     pray." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 152: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "The sun and the moon do not
     eclipse because of the death or life (i.e. birth) of
     someone but they are two signs amongst the
     signs of Allah. When you see them offer the
     prayer." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 153: 

     Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba: 

     "The sun eclipsed in the life-time of Allah's
     Apostle on the day when (his son) Ibrahim died.
     So the people said that the sun had eclipsed
     because of the death of Ibrahim. Allah's Apostle
     said, "The sun and the moon do not eclipse
     because of the death or life (i.e. birth) of
     some-one. When you see the eclipse pray and
     invoke Allah." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 154: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     In the life-time of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) the
     sun eclipsed, so he led the people in prayer, and
     stood up and performed a long Qiyam, then
     bowed for a long while. He stood up again and
     performed a long Qiyam but this time the period
     of standing was shorter than the first. He bowed
     again for a long time but shorter than the first
     one, then he prostrated and prolonged the
     prostration. He did the same in the second Raka
     as he did in the first and then finished the prayer;
     by then the sun (eclipse) had cleared. He
     delivered the Khutba (sermon) and after praising
     and glorifying Allah he said, "The sun and the
     moon are two signs against the signs of Allah;
     they do not eclipse on the death or life of anyone.
     So when you see the eclipse, remember Allah
     and say Takbir, pray and give Sadaqa." The
     Prophet then said, "O followers of Muhammad!
     By Allah! There is none who has more ghaira
     (self-respect) than Allah as He has forbidden that
     His slaves, male or female commit adultery
     (illegal sexual intercourse). O followers of
     Muhammad! By Allah! If you knew that which I
     know you would laugh little and weep much. 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 155: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr : 

     "When the sun eclipsed in the life-time of Allah's
     Apostle an announcement was made that a
     prayer was to be offered in congregation." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 156: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) In the lifetime
     of the Prophet the sun eclipsed and he went to
     the Mosque and the people aligned behind him.
     He said the Takbir (starting the prayer) and
     prolonged the recitation (from the Quran) and
     then said Takbir and performed a prolonged
     bowing; then he (lifted his head and) said, "Sami
     allahu liman hamidah" (Allah heard him who sent
     his praises to Him). He then did not prostrate but
     stood up and recited a prolonged recitation
     which was shorter than the first recitation. He
     again said Takbir and then bowed a prolonged
     bowing but shorter than the first one and then
     said, "Sami 'a-l-lahu Lyman hamidah Rabbana
     walak-lhamd, (Allah heard him who sent his
     praises to Him. O our Sustainer! All the praises
     are for You)" and then prostrated and did the
     same in the second Raka; thus he completed four
     bowing and four prostrations. The sun (eclipse)
     had cleared before he finished the prayer. (After
     the prayer) he stood up, glorified and praised
     Allah as He deserved and then said, "The sun
     and the moon are two of the signs of Allah. They
     do not eclipse because of the death or the life
     (i.e. birth) of someone. When you see them
     make haste for the prayer." Narrated Az-Zuhri: I
     said to 'Ursa, "When the sun eclipsed at Medina
     your brother ('Abdullah bin Az-Zubair) offered
     only a two-Rakat prayer like that of the morning
     (Fajr) prayer." 'Ursa replied, "Yes, for he missed
     the Prophet's tradition (concerning this matter)." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 157: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) On the day when the
     sun Khasafat (eclipsed) Allah's Apostle prayed;
     he stood up and said Takbir and recited a
     prolonged recitation, then he performed a
     prolonged bowing, then he raised his head and
     said, "Sami'a-l-lahu Lyman Hamidah," and then
     remained standing and recited a prolonged
     recitation which was shorter than the first. Then
     he performed a prolonged bowing which was
     shorter than the first. Then he prostrated and
     prolonged the prostration and he did the same in
     the second Raka as in the first and then finished
     the prayer with Taslim. By that time the sun
     (eclipse) had cleared He addressed the people
     and said, "The sun and the moon are two of the
     signs of Allah; they do not eclipse (Yakhsifan)
     because of the death or the life (i.e. birth) of
     someone. So when you see them make haste for
     the prayer." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 158: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     Allah's Apostle said: "The sun and the moon are
     two signs amongst the signs of Allah and they do
     not eclipse because of the death of someone but
     Allah frightens His devotees with them." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 159: 

     Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman: 

     A Jewess came to ask 'Aisha (the wife of the
     Prophet) about something. She said to her, "May
     Allah give you refuge from the punishment of the
     grave." So 'Aisha ' asked Allah's Apostle "Would
     the people be punished in their graves?" Allah's
     Apostle after seeking refuge with Allah from the
     punishment of the grave (and thus replied in the
     affirmative). Then one day, Allah's Apostle rode
     to go to some place but the sun eclipsed. He
     returned in the forenoon and passed through the
     rear of the dwellings (of his wives) and stood for
     the (eclipse) prayer, and the people stood behind
     him. He stood up for a long period and then
     performed a prolonged bowing which was
     shorter than the first bowing. Then he raised his
     head and prostrated. Then he stood up (for the
     second Raka) for a long while but the standing
     was shorter than that of the first Raka. Then he
     performed a prolonged bowing which was
     shorter than the first one. Then he raised his head
     and prostrated. Then he stood up for a long time
     but shorter than the first. Then he performed a
     prolonged bowing but shorter than the first. Then
     he raised his head and prostrated and finished the
     prayer and (then delivered the sermon and) said
     as much as Allah wished. And then he ordered
     the people to seek refuge with Allah from the
     punishment of the grave. 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 160: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr 

     When the sun eclipsed in the lifetime of Allah's
     Apostle and an announcement was made that the
     prayer was to be held in congregation. The
     Prophet performed two bowing in one Raka.
     Then he stood up and performed two bowing in
     one Raka. Then he sat down and finished the
     prayer; and by then the (eclipse) had cleared
     'Aisha said, "I had never performed such a long
     prostration." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 161: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas: 

     The sun eclipsed in the life-time of the Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) . Allah's Apostle offered the eclipse
     prayer and stood for a long period equal to the
     period in which one could recite
     Surat-al-Baqara. Then he bowed for a long time
     and then stood up for a long period which was
     shorter than that of the first standing, then bowed
     again for a long time but for a shorter period than
     the first; then he prostrated twice and then stood
     up for a long period which was shorter than that
     of the first standing; then he bowed for a long
     time which was shorter than the previous one,
     and then he raised his head and stood up for a
     long period which was shorter than the first
     standing, then he bowed for a long time which
     was shorter than the first bowing, and then
     prostrated (twice) and finished the prayer. By
     then, the sun (eclipse) had cleared. The Prophet
     then said, "The sun and the moon are two of the
     signs of Allah. They eclipse neither because of
     the death of somebody nor because of his life
     (i.e. birth). So when you see them, remember
     Allah." The people say, "O Allah's Apostle! We
     saw you taking something from your place and
     then we saw you retreating." The Prophet
     replied, "I saw Paradise and stretched my hands
     towards a bunch (of its fruits) and had I taken it,
     you would have eaten from it as long as the
     world remains. I also saw the Hell-fire and I had
     never seen such a horrible sight. I saw that most
     of the inhabitants were women." The people
     asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Why is it so?" The
     Prophet replied, "Because of their
     ungratefulness." It was asked whether they are
     ungrateful to Allah. The Prophet said, "They are
     ungrateful to their companions of life (husbands)
     and ungrateful to good deeds. If you are
     benevolent to one of them throughout the life and
     if she sees anything (undesirable) in you, she will
     say, 'I have never had any good from you.' " 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 162: 

     Narrated Fatima bint Al-Mundhir: 

     Asma' bint Al Bakr said, "I came to 'Aisha the
     wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) during the solar
     eclipse. The people were standing and offering
     the prayer and she was also praying too. I asked
     her, 'What has happened to the people?' She
     pointed out with her hand towards the sky and
     said, 'Subhan-Allah'. I said, 'Is there a sign?' She
     pointed out in the affirmative." Asma' further said,
     "I too then stood up for the prayer till I fainted
     and then poured water on my head. When
     Allah's Apostle had finished his prayer, he
     thanked and praised Allah and said, 'I have seen
     at this place of mine what I have never seen even
     Paradise and Hell. No doubt, it has been inspired
     to me that you will be put to trial in the graves
     like or nearly like the trial of (Masih) Ad-Dajjal.
     (I do not know which one of the two Asma'
     said.) (The angels) will come to everyone of you
     and will ask what do you know about this man
     (i.e. Muhammad). The believer or a firm believer
     (I do not know which word Asma' said) will
     reply, 'He is Muhammad, Allah's Apostle
     (p.b.u.h) who came to us with clear evidences
     and guidance, so we accepted his teachings,
     believed and followed him.' The angels will then
     say to him, 'Sleep peacefully as we knew surely
     that you were a firm believer.' The hypocrite or
     doubtful person (I do not know which word
     Asma' said) will say, 'I do not know. I heard the
     people saying something so I said it (the same).' "


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 163: 

     Narrated Asma: 

     No doubt the Prophet ordered people to
     manumit slaves during the solar eclipse. 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 164: 

     Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman: 

     A Jewess came to 'Aisha to ask her about
     something and then she said, "May Allah give
     you refuge from the punishment of the grave." So
     'Aisha asked Allah's Apostle, "Would the people
     be punished in their graves?" Allah's Apostle
     asked Allah's refuge from the punishment of the
     grave (indicating an affirmative reply). Then one
     day Allah's Apostle rode (to leave for some
     place) but the sun eclipsed. He returned on the
     forenoon and passed through the rear of the
     dwellings (of his wives) and stood up and started
     offering the (eclipse) prayer and the people stood
     behind him. He stood for a long period and then
     performed a long bowing and then stood straight
     for a long period which was shorter than that of
     the first standing, then he performed a prolonged
     bowing which was shorter than the first bowing,
     then he raised his head and prostrated for a long
     time and then stood up (for the second Raka) for
     a long while, but the standing was shorter than
     the standing of the first Raka. Then he performed
     a prolonged bowing which was shorter than that
     of the first one. He then stood up for a long time
     but shorter than the first, then again performed a
     long bowing which was shorter than the first and
     then prostrated for a shorter while than that of
     the first prostration. Then he finished the prayer
     and delivered the sermon and) said what Allah
     wished; and ordered the people to seek refuge
     with Allah from the punishment of the grave. 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 165: 

     Narrated Abu Masud: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The sun and the moon do
     not eclipse because of someone's death or life
     but they are two signs amongst the signs of Allah,
     so pray whenever you see them." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 166: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     In the lifetime of the Prophet the sun eclipsed and
     the Prophet (p.b.u.h) stood up to offer the prayer
     with the people and recited a long recitation, then
     he performed a prolonged bowing, and then
     lifted his head and recited a prolonged recitation
     which was shorter than the first. Then he
     performed a prolonged bowing which was
     shorter than the first and then lifted his head and
     performed two prostrations. He then stood up
     for the second Raka and offered it like the first.
     Then he stood up and said, "The sun and the
     moon do not eclipse because of someone's life or
     death but they are two signs amongst the signs of
     Allah which He shows to His worshipers. So
     whenever you see them, make haste for the
     prayer." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 167: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The sun eclipsed and the Prophet got up, being
     afraid that it might be the Hour (i.e. Day of
     Judgment). He went to the Mosque and offered
     the prayer with the longest Qiyam, bowing and
     prostration that I had ever seen him doing. Then
     he said, "These signs which Allah sends do not
     occur because of the life or death of somebody,
     but Allah makes His worshipers afraid by them.
     So when you see anything thereof, proceed to
     remember Allah, invoke Him and ask for His
     forgiveness." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 168: 

     Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba : 

     On the day of Ibrahim's death, the sun eclipsed
     and the people said that the eclipse was due to
     the death of Ibrahim (the son of the Prophet).
     Allah's Apostle said, "The sun and the moon are
     two signs amongst the signs of Allah. They do
     not eclipse because of someone's death or life.
     So when you see them, invoke Allah and pray till
     the eclipse is clear." 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 169: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     In the life-time of the Prophet the sun eclipsed
     and then he offered a two Rakat prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 170: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     In the life-time of the Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h)
     the sun eclipsed and he went out dragging his
     clothes till he reached the Mosque. The people
     gathered around him and he led them and offered
     two Rakat. When the sun (eclipse) cleared, he
     said, "The sun and the moon are two signs
     amongst the signs of Allah; they do not eclipse
     because of the death of someone, and so when
     an eclipse occurs, pray and invoke Allah till the
     eclipse is over." It happened that a son of the
     Prophet called Ibrahim died on that day and the
     people were talking about that (saying that the
     eclipse was caused by his death). 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 171: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The Prophet led us and performed four bowing
     in two Rakat during the solar eclipse and the first
     Raka was longer. 


Volume 2, Book 18, Number 172: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) recited (the Quran) aloud
     during the eclipse prayer and when he had
     finished the eclipse prayer he said the Takbir and
     bowed. When he stood straight from bowing he
     would say "Sami 'al-l-ahu Lyman hamidah
     Rabbana walaka-l-hamd." And he would again
     start reciting. In the eclipse prayer there are four
     bowing and four prostrations in two Rakat.
     Al-Auza'i and others said that they had heard
     Az-Zuhi from 'Ursa from 'Aisha saying, "In the
     life-time of Allah's Apostle the sun eclipsed, and
     he made a person to announce: 'Prayer in
     congregation.' He led the prayer and performed
     four bowing and four prostrations in two Rakat."
     Narrated Al-Walid that 'Abdur-Rahman bin
     Namir had informed him that he had heard the
     same. Ibn Shihab heard the same. Az-Zuhrl said,
     "I asked ('Ursa), 'What did your brother
     'Abdullah bin AzZubair do? He prayed two
     Rakat (of the eclipse prayer) like the morning
     prayer, when he offered the (eclipse) prayer in
     Median.' 'Ursa replied that he had missed (i.e.
     did not pray according to) the Prophet's
     tradition." Sulaiman bin Kathir and Sufyan bin
     Husain narrated from Az-Zuhri that the prayer
     for the eclipse used to be offered with loud
     recitation. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 19: 

  Prostration During Recital
               of Qur'an 



Volume 2, Book 19, Number 173: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud : 

     The Prophet recited Suratan-Najm (103) at
     Mecca and prostrated while reciting it and those
     who were with him did the same except an old
     man who took a handful of small stones or earth
     and lifted it to his forehead and said, "This is
     sufficient for me." Later on, I saw him killed as a
     non-believer. 


Volume 2, Book 19, Number 174: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     On Fridays the Prophet used to recite Alf Lam
     Mim Tanzil-As-Sajda (in the first Raka) and Hal
     ata'alal-lnsani i.e. Suratad-Dahr (LXXVI) (in the
     second Raka), in the Fajr prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 19, Number 175: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The prostration of Sad is not a compulsory one
     but I saw the Prophet prostrating while reciting it.


Volume 2, Book 19, Number 176: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud: 

     The Prophet recited Surat-an-Najm (53) and
     prostrated while reciting it and all the people
     prostrated and a man amongst the people took a
     handful of stones or earth and raised it to his face
     and said, "This is sufficient for me. Later on I saw
     him killed as a Nobel ever. " 


Volume 2, Book 19, Number 177: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet I prostrated while reciting An-Najm
     and with him prostrated the Muslims, the pagans,
     the jinns, and all human beings. 


Volume 2, Book 19, Number 178: 

     Narrated 'Ata' bin Yasar: 

     I asked Zaid bin Thabit about prostration on
     which he said that he had recited An-Najm
     before the Prophet, yet he (the Prophet) had not
     performed a prostration. 


Volume 2, Book 19, Number 179: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Thabit: 

     I recited An-Najm before the Prophet, yet he did
     not perform a prostration. 


Volume 2, Book 19, Number 180: 

     Narrated Abu Salma: 

     I saw Abu Huraira reciting Idha-Sama'
     un-Shaqqat and he prostrated during its
     recitation. I asked Abu Huraira, "Didn't I see you
     prostrating?" Abu Huraira said, "Had I not seen
     the Prophet prostrating, I would not have
     prostrated." 


Volume 2, Book 19, Number 181: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     When the Prophet recited a Sura that contained
     the prostration he would prostrate and we would
     do the same and some of us (because of the
     heavy rush) could not find a place for prostration.


Volume 2, Book 19, Number 182: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar, 

     When the Prophet recited Surat As-Sajda and
     we were with him, he would prostrate and we
     also would prostrate with him and some of us
     (because of the heavy rush) would not find a
     place (for our foreheads) to prostrate on. 


Volume 2, Book 19, Number 183: 

     Narrated Rabi'a: 

     'Umar bin Al-Khattab recited Surat-an-Nahl on
     a Friday on the pulpit and when he reached the
     verse of Sajda he got down from the pulpit and
     prostrated and the people also prostrated. The
     next Friday 'Umar bin Al-Khattab recited the
     same Sura and when he reached the verse of
     Sajda he said, "O people! When we recite the
     verses of Sajda (during the sermon) whoever
     prostrates does the right thing, yet it is no sin for
     the one who does not prostrate." And 'Umar did
     not prostrate (that day). Added Ibn 'Umar "Allah
     has not made the prostration of recitation
     compulsory but if we wish we can do it." 


Volume 2, Book 19, Number 184: 

     Narrated Abu Rafi: 

     I offered the 'Isha' prayer behind Abu Huraira
     and he recited Idhas-Sama' Un-Shaqqat, and
     prostrated. I said, "What is this?" Abu Huraira
     said, "I prostrated behind Abu-l-Qasim and I will
     do the same till I meet him." 


Volume 2, Book 19, Number 185: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar. 

     Whenever the Prophet recited the Sura which
     contained the prostration of recitation he used to
     prostrate and then, we, too, would prostrate and
     some of us did not find a place for prostration. 

Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 20: 

     Shortening the Prayers
             (At-Taqseer) 



Volume 2, Book 20, Number 186: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas : 

     The Prophet once stayed for nineteen days and
     prayed shortened prayers. So when we travel led
     (and stayed) for nineteen days, we used to
     shorten the prayer but if we travelled (and
     stayed) for a longer period we used to offer the
     full prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 187: 

     Narrated Yahya bin Ishaq: 

     I heard Anas saying, "We travelled with the
     Prophet from Medina to Mecca and offered two
     Rakat (for every prayer) till we returned to
     Medina." I said, "Did you stay for a while in
     Mecca?" He replied, "We stayed in Mecca for
     ten days." 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 188: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     I offered the prayer with the Prophet, Abu Bakr
     and 'Umar at Mina and it was of two Rakat.
     'Uthman in the early days of his caliphate did the
     same, but later on he started praying the full
     prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 189: 

     Narrated Haritha bin Wahab: 

     The Prophet I led us in the prayer at Mina during
     the peace period by offering two Rakat. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 190: 

     Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Yazid: 

     We offered a four Rakat prayer at Mina behind
     Ibn 'Affan . 'Abdullah bin Masud was informed
     about it. He said sadly, "Truly to Allah we belong
     and truly to Him we shall return." And added, "I
     prayed two Rakat with Allah's Apostle at Mina
     and similarly with Abu Bakr and with 'Umar
     (during their caliphates)." He further said, "May I
     be lucky enough to have two of the four Rakat
     accepted (by Allah)." 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 191: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet and his companions reached Mecca
     in the morning of the 4th Dhul-Hijja reciting
     Talbiya (O Allah! We are obedient to your
     orders, we respond 4 to your call) . . . intending
     to perform Hajj. The Prophet ordered his
     companions to assume the lhram for Umra
     instead of Hajj, excepting those who had Hadi
     (sacrifice) with them. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 192: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "A woman should not travel
     for more than three days except with a
     Dhi-Mahram (i.e. a male with whom she cannot
     marry at all, e.g. her brother, father, grandfather,
     etc.) or her own husband.)" 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 193: 

     Narrated Ibn'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "A woman should not travel
     for more than three days except with a
     Dhi-Mahram." 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 194: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "It is not permissible
     for a woman who believes in Allah and the Last
     Day to travel for one day and night except with a
     Mahram." 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 195: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik : 

     offered four Rakat of Zuhr prayer with the
     Prophet (p.b.u.h) at Medina and two Rakat at
     Dhul-Hulaifa. (i.e. shortened the 'Asr prayer). 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 196: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     "When the prayers were first enjoined they were
     of two Rakat each. Later the prayer in a journey
     was kept as it was but the prayers for
     non-travellers were completed." Az-Zuhri said, "I
     asked 'Urwa what made Aisha pray the full
     prayers (in journey)." He replied, "She did the
     same as 'Uthman did." 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 197: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     "I saw Allah's Apostle delaying the Maghrib
     prayer till he offered it along with the 'Isha'
     prayer whenever he was in a hurry during the
     journey." Salim narrated, "Ibn 'Umar used to do
     the same whenever he was in a hurry during the
     journey." And Salim added, "Ibn 'Umar used to
     pray the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers together in
     Al-Muzdalifa." Salim said, "Ibn 'Umar delayed
     the Maghrib prayer because at that time he heard
     the news of the death of his wife Safiya bint Abi
     'Ubaid. I said to him, 'The prayer (is due).' He
     said, 'Go on.' Again I said, 'The prayer (is due).'
     He said, 'Go on,' till we covered two or three
     miles. Then he got down, prayed and said, 'I saw
     the Prophet praying in this way, whenever he
     was in a hurry during the journey.' 'Abdullah (bin
     'Umar) added, "Whenever the Prophet was in a
     hurry, he used to delay the Maghrib prayer and
     then offer three Rakat (of the Maghrib) and
     perform Taslim, and after waiting for a short
     while, Iqama used to be pronounced for the
     'Isha' prayer when he would offer two Rakat and
     perform Taslim. He would never offer any
     optional prayer till the middle of the night (when
     he used to pray the Tahajjud)." 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 198: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amir from his father who
     said: 

     I saw the Prophet (p.b.u.h) offering the prayer on
     his mount (Rahila) whatever direction it took. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 199: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah, 

     The Prophet used to offer the Nawafil, while
     riding, facing a direction other than that of the
     Qibla. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 200: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar (while on a journey) used to offer the
     prayer and the Witr on his mount (Rahila). He
     said that the Prophet used to do so. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 201: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar: 

     On traveling, 'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to offer
     the prayer on his Mount by signs whatever
     direction it took. 'Abdullah said that the Prophet
     used to do so. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 202: 

     Narrated 'Amir bin Rabi'a, 

     I saw the Prophet on his Mount praying Nawafil
     by nodding his head, whatever direction he
     faced, but Allah's Apostle never did the same in
     offering the compulsory prayers. Narrated Salim:
     At night'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to offer the
     prayer on the back of his animal during the
     journey and never cared about the direction he
     faced. Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle used to
     offer the optional prayer on the back of his
     Mount facing any direction and also used to pray
     the Witr on it but never offered the compulsory
     prayer on it." 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 203: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah 

     The Prophet used to pray (the Nawafil) on his
     Mount facing east and whenever he wanted to
     offer the compulsory prayer, he used to dismount
     and face the Qibla. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 204: 

     Narrated Anas bin Sirin: 

     We went to receive Anas bin Malik when he
     returned from Sham and met him at a place
     called 'Ain-at-Tamr. I saw him praying riding the
     donkey, with his face to this direction, i.e. to the
     left of the Qibla. I said to him, "I have seen you
     offering the prayer in a direction other than that
     of the Qibla." He replied, "If I had not seen
     Allah's Apostle doing it, I would not have done
     it." 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 205: 

     Narrated Hafs bin 'Asim: 

     Ibn 'Umar went on a journey and said, "I
     accompanied the Prophet and he did not offer
     optional prayers during the journey, and Allah
     says: 'Verily! In Allah's Apostle you have a good
     example to follow.' " (33.21) 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 206: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar : 

     I accompanied Allah's Apostle and he never
     offered more than two Rakat during the journey.
     Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman used to do the
     same. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 207: 

     Narrated Ibn Abu Laila: 

     Only Um Hani told us that she had seen the
     Prophet (p.b.u.h) offering the Duha (forenoon
     prayer). She said, "On the day of the conquest of
     Mecca, the Prophet took a bath in my house and
     offered eight Rakat. I never saw him praying
     such a light prayer but he performed perfect
     prostration and bowing. Narrated 'Abdullah bin
     amir that his father had told him that he had seen
     the Prophet (p.b.u.h) praying Nawafil at night on
     the back of his Mount on a journey, facing
     whatever direction it took. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 208: 

     Narrated Salim bin Abdullah: 

     Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle used to pray the
     Nawafil on the back of his Mount (carriage) by
     signs facing any direction." Ibn 'Umar used to do
     the same. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 209: 

     Narrated Salim's father: 

     The Prophet used to offer the Maghrib and Isha'
     prayers together whenever he was in a hurry on a
     journey. 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: Allah's Apostle used to
     offer the Zuhr and 'Asr prayers together on
     journeys, and also used to offer the Maghrib and
     'Isha' prayers together. 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: The Prophet used to
     offer the Maghrib and the 'Isha' prayers together
     on journeys. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 210: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri: 

     Salim told me, "'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, 'I saw
     Allah's Apostle delaying the Maghrib prayer till
     he offered it along with the Isha prayer whenever
     he was in a hurry during the journey.' " Salim
     said, "Abdullah bin Umar used to do the same
     whenever he was in a hurry during the journey.
     After making the call for Iqama, for the Maghrib
     prayer he used to offer three Rakat and then
     perform Tasllm. After waiting for a short while,
     he would pronounce the Iqama for the 'Isha'
     prayer and offer two Rakat and perform Taslim.
     He never prayed any Nawafil in between the two
     prayers or after the 'Isha' prayers till he got up in
     the middle of the night (for Tahajjud prayer)." 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 211: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle used to offer these two prayers
     together on journeys i.e. the Maghrib and the
     'Isha'. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 212: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Whenever the Prophet started a journey before
     noon, he used to delay the Zuhr prayer till the
     time of 'Asr and then offer them together; and if
     the sun declined (at noon) he used to offer the
     Zuhr prayer and then ride (for the journey). 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 213: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Whenever the Prophet started the journey before
     noon, he used to delay the Zuhr prayer till the
     time for the 'Asr prayer and then he would
     dismount and pray them together; and whenever
     the sun declined before he started the journey he
     used to offer the Zuhr prayer and then ride (for
     the journey). 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 214: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle prayed in his house while sitting
     during his illness and the people prayed behind
     him standing and he pointed to them to sit down.
     When he had finished the prayer, he said, "The
     Imam is to be followed and so when he bows
     you should bow; and when he lifts his head you
     should also do the same." 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 215: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) fell down from a horse
     and his right side was either injured or scratched,
     so we went to inquire about his health. The time
     for the prayer became due and he offered the
     prayer while sitting and we prayed while
     standing. He said, "The Imam is to be followed;
     so if he says Takbir, you should also say Takbir,
     and if he bows you should also bow; and when
     he lifts his head you should also do the same and
     if he says: Sami'a-l-lahu Liman Hamidah (Allah
     hears whoever sends his praises to Him) you
     should say: Rabbana walakal-Hamd (O our
     Lord! All the praises are for You.") (See Hadith
     No. 656 Vol. 1). 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 216: 

     Narrated 'Imran bin Husain: 

     (who had piles) I asked Allah's Apostle about
     the praying of a man while sitting. He said, "If he
     prays while standing it is better and he who prays
     while sitting gets half the reward of that who
     prays standing; and whoever prays while Lying
     gets half the reward of that who prays while
     sitting." 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 217: 

     Narrated'Abdullah bin Buraida: 

     'Imran bin Husain had piles. Once Abu Ma mar
     narrated from 'Imran bin Husain had said, "I
     asked the Prophet (p.b.u.h) about the prayer of a
     person while sitting. He said, 'It is better for one
     to pray standing; and whoever prays sitting gets
     half the reward of that who prays while standing;
     and whoever prays while Lying gets half the
     reward of that who prays while sitting.' " 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 218: 

     Narrated 'Imran bin Husain: 

     had piles, so I asked the Prophet about the
     prayer. He said, "Pray while standing and if you
     can't, pray while sitting and if you cannot do even
     that, then pray Lying on your side." 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 219: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     (the mother of the faithful believers) I never saw
     Allah's Apostle offering the night prayer while
     sitting except in his old age and then he used to
     recite while sitting and whenever he wanted to
     bow he would get up and recite thirty or forty
     verses (while standing) and then bow. 


Volume 2, Book 20, Number 220: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the mother of the faithful believers) Allah's
     Apostle (in his last days) used to pray sitting. He
     would recite while sitting, and when thirty or forty
     verses remained from the recitation he would get
     up and recite them while standing and then he
     would bow and prostrate. He used to do the
     same in the second Raka. After finishing the
     Prayer he used to look at me and if I was awake
     he would talk to me and if I was asleep, he
     would lie down. 

Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 21: 

 Prayer at Night (Tahajjud) 



Volume 2, Book 21, Number 221: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When the Prophet got up at night to offer the
     Tahajjud prayer, he used to say: Allahumma
     lakal-hamd. Anta qaiyimus-samawati wal-ard wa
     man fihinna. Walakal-hamd, Laka
     mulkus-samawati wal-ard wa man fihinna.
     Walakal-hamd, anta nurus-samawati wal-ard.
     Walakalhamd, anta-l-haq wa wa'duka-l-haq, wa
     liqa'uka Haq, wa qualuka Haq, wal-jannatu Han
     wan-naru Haq wannabiyuna Haq. Wa
     Muhammadun, sallal-lahu'alaihi wasallam, Haq,
     was-sa'atu Haq. Allahumma aslamtu Laka
     wabika amantu, wa 'Alaika tawakkaltu, wa ilaika
     anabtu wa bika khasamtu, wa ilaika hakamtu
     faghfir li ma qaddamtu wama akh-khartu wama
     as-rartu wama'a lantu, anta-l-muqaddim wa
     anta-l-mu akh-khir, la ilaha illa anta (or la ilaha
     ghairuka). (O Allah! All the praises are for you,
     You are the Holder of the Heavens and the
     Earth, And whatever is in them. All the praises
     are for You; You have the possession of the
     Heavens and the Earth And whatever is in them.
     All the praises are for You; You are the Light of
     the Heavens and the Earth And all the praises are
     for You; You are the King of the Heavens and
     the Earth; And all the praises are for You; You
     are the Truth and Your Promise is the truth, And
     to meet You is true, Your Word is the truth And
     Paradise is true And Hell is true And all the
     Prophets (Peace be upon them) are true; And
     Muhammad is true, And the Day of Resurrection
     is true. O Allah ! I surrender (my will) to You; I
     believe in You and depend on You. And repent
     to You, And with Your help I argue (with my
     opponents, the non-believers) And I take You as
     a judge (to judge between us). Please forgive me
     my previous And future sins; And whatever I
     concealed or revealed And You are the One
     who make (some people) forward And (some)
     backward. There is none to be worshipped but
     you . Sufyan said that 'Abdul Karim Abu Umaiya
     added to the above, 'Wala haula Wala quwata
     illa billah' (There is neither might nor power
     except with Allah). 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 222: 

     Narrated Salim's father: 

     In the life-time of the Prophet whosoever saw a
     dream would narrate it to Allah's Apostle. I had
     a wish of seeing a dream to narrate it to Allah's
     Apostle (p.b.u.h) I was a grown up boy and
     used to sleep in the Mosque in the life-time of the
     Prophet. I saw in the dream that two angels
     caught hold of me and took me to the Fire which
     was built all round like a built well and had two
     poles in it and the people in it were known to me.
     I started saying, "I seek refuge with Allah from
     the Fire." Then I met another angel who told me
     not to be afraid. I narrated the dream to Hafsa
     who told it to Allah's Apostle. The Prophet said,
     "Abdullah is a good man. I wish he prayed
     Tahajjud." After that 'Abdullah (i.e. Salim's
     father) used to sleep but a little at night. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 223: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to offer eleven Rakat and
     that was his prayer. He used to prolong the
     prostration to such an extent that one could recite
     fifty verses (of the Quran) before he would lift his
     head. He used to pray two Rakat (Sunna) before
     the Fajr prayer and then used to lie down on his
     right side till the call-maker came and informed
     him about the prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 224: 

     Narrated Jundab: 

     The Prophet became sick and did not get up (for
     Tahajjud prayer) for a night or two. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 225: 

     Narrated Jundab bin 'Abdullah : 

     Gabriel did not come to the Prophet (for some
     time) and so one of the Quraish women said,
     "His Satan has deserted him." So came the
     Divine Revelation: "By the forenoon And by the
     night When it is still! Your Lord (O Muhammad)
     has neither Forsaken you Nor hated you."
     (93.1-3) 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 226: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     One night the Prophet got up and said, "Subhan
     Allah! How many afflictions Allah has revealed
     tonight and how many treasures have been sent
     down (disclosed). Go and wake the sleeping
     lady occupants of these dwellings up (for
     prayers), perhaps a well-dressed in this world
     may be naked in the Hereafter." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 227: 

     Narrated 'Ali bin Abi Talib 

     One night Allah's Apostle came to me and
     Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet and asked,
     "Won't you pray (at night)?" I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Our souls are in the hands of Allah and
     if He wants us to get up He will make us get up."
     When I said that, he left us without saying
     anything and I heard that he was hitting his thigh
     and saying, "But man is more quarrelsome than
     anything." (18.54) 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 228: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to give up a good deed,
     although he loved to do it, for fear that people
     might act on it and it might be made compulsory
     for them. The Prophet never prayed the Duha
     prayer, but I offer it. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 229: 

     Narrated 'Aisha, the mother of the faithful
     believers: 

     One night Allah's Apostle offered the prayer in
     the Mosque and the people followed him. The
     next night he also offered the prayer and too
     many people gathered. On the third and the
     fourth nights more people gathered, but Allah's
     Apostle did not come out to them. In the morning
     he said, "I saw what you were doing and nothing
     but the fear that it (i.e. the prayer) might be
     enjoined on you, stopped me from coming to
     you." And that happened in the month of
     Ramadan. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 230: 

     Narrated Al-Mughira: 

     The Prophet used to stand (in the prayer) or pray
     till both his feet or legs swelled. He was asked
     why (he offered such an unbearable prayer) and
     he said, "should I not be a thankful slave." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 231: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As: 

     Allah's Apostle told me, "The most beloved
     prayer to Allah is that of David and the most
     beloved fasts to Allah are those of David. He
     used to sleep for half of the night and then pray
     for one third of the night and again sleep for its
     sixth part and used to fast on alternate days." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 232: 

     Narrated Masruq: 

     I asked 'Aisha which deed was most loved by
     the Prophet. She said, "A deed done
     continuously." I further asked, "When did he
     used to get up (in the night for the prayer)." She
     said, "He used to get up on hearing the crowing
     of a cock." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 233: 

     Narrated Al-Ashath: 

     He (the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ) used to get up for the
     prayer on hearing the crowing of a cock. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 234: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     In my house he (Prophet (p.b.u.h) ) never passed
     the last hours of the night but sleeping. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 235: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     Anas bin Malik said, "The Prophet (p.b.u.h) and
     Zaid bin Thabit took their Suhur together. When
     they finished it, the Prophet stood for the (Fajr)
     prayer and offered it." We asked Anas, "What
     was the interval between their finishing the Suhur
     and the starting of the morning prayer?" Anas
     replied, "It was equal to the time taken by a
     person in reciting fifty verses of the Quran." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 236: 

     Narrated Abu-Wa il: 

     'Abdullah said, "One night I offered the Tahajjud
     prayer with the Prophet and he kept on standing
     till an ill-thought came to me." We said, "What
     was the ill-thought?" He said, "It was to sit down
     and leave the Prophet (standing)." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 237: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa : 

     Whenever the Prophet got up for Tahajjud
     prayer he used to clean his mouth (and teeth)
     with Siwak. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 238: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar : 

     A man said, "O Allah's Apostle! How is the
     prayer of the night?" He said, "Two Rakat
     followed by two Rakat and so on, and when you
     apprehend the approaching dawn, offer one
     Raka as Witr." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 239: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The prayer of the Prophet used to be of thirteen
     Rakat, i.e. of the night prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 240: 

     Narrated Masruq: 

     I asked Aisha about the night prayer of Allah's
     Apostle and she said, "It was seven, nine or
     eleven Rakat besides the two Rakat of the Fajr
     prayer (i.e. Sunna). " 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 241: 

     Narrated 'Aisha, 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to offer thirteen
     Rakat of the night prayer and that included the
     Witr and two Rakat (Sunna) of the Fajr prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 242: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik 

     Sometimes Allah's Apostle would not fast (for so
     many days) that we thought that he would not
     fast that month and he sometimes used to fast
     (for so many days) that we thought he would not
     leave fasting through-out that month and (as
     regards his prayer and sleep at night), if you
     wanted to see him praying at night, you could see
     him praying and if you wanted to see him
     sleeping, you could see him sleeping. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 243: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Satan puts three knots at
     the back of the head of any of you if he is asleep.
     On every knot he reads and exhales the following
     words, 'The night is long, so stay asleep.' When
     one wakes up and remembers Allah, one knot is
     undone; and when one performs ablution, the
     second knot is undone, and when one prays the
     third knot is undone and one gets up energetic
     with a good heart in the morning; otherwise one
     gets up lazy and with a mischievous heart." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 244: 

     Narrated Samura bin Jundab: 

     The Prophet said in his narration of a dream that
     he saw, "He whose head was being crushed with
     a stone was one who learnt the Quran but never
     acted on it, and slept ignoring the compulsory
     prayers." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 245: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah : 

     A person was mentioned before the Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) and he was told that he had kept on
     sleeping till morning and had not got up for the
     prayer. The Prophet said, "Satan urinated in his
     ears." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 246: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Our Lord, the
     Blessed, the Superior, comes every night down
     on the nearest Heaven to us when the last third of
     the night remains, saying: "Is there anyone to
     invoke Me, so that I may respond to invocation?
     Is there anyone to ask Me, so that I may grant
     him his request? Is there anyone seeking My
     forgiveness, so that I may forgive him?" 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 247: 

     Narrated Al-Aswad: 

     I asked 'Aisha "How is the night prayer of the
     Prophet?" She replied, "He used to sleep early at
     night, and get up in its last part to pray, and then
     return to his bed. When the Muadh-dhin
     pronounced the Adhan, he would get up. If he
     was in need of a bath he would take it; otherwise
     he would perform ablution and then go out (for
     the prayer)." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 248: 

     Narrated Abu Salma bin 'Abdur Rahman: 

     I asked 'Aisha, "How is the prayer of Allah's
     Apostle during the month of Ramadan." She said,
     "Allah's Apostle never exceeded eleven Rakat in
     Ramadan or in other months; he used to offer
     four Rakat-- do not ask me about their beauty
     and length, then four Rakat, do not ask me about
     their beauty and length, and then three Rakat."
     Aisha further said, "I said, 'O Allah's Apostle!
     Do you sleep before offering the Witr prayer?'
     He replied, 'O 'Aisha! My eyes sleep but my
     heart remains awake'!" 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 249: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I did not see the Prophet reciting (the Quran) in
     the night prayer while sitting except when he
     became old; when he used to recite while sitting,
     and when thirty or forty verses remained from the
     Sura, he would get up and recite them and then
     bow. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 250: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     At the time of the Fajr prayer the Prophet asked
     Bilal, "Tell me of the best deed you did after
     embracing Islam, for I heard your footsteps in
     front of me in Paradise." Bilal replied, "I did not
     do anything worth mentioning except that
     whenever I performed ablution during the day or
     night, I prayed after that ablution as much as was
     written for me." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 251r: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik 

     Once the Prophet (p.b.u.h) entered the Mosque
     and saw a rope hanging in between its two
     pillars. He said, "What is this rope?" The people
     said, "This rope is for Zainab who, when she
     feels tired, holds it (to keep standing for the
     prayer.)" The Prophet said, "Don't use it.
     Remove the rope. You should pray as long as
     you feel active, and when you get tired, sit
     down." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 251n: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     A woman from the tribe of Bani Asad was sitting
     with me and Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) came to
     my house and said, "Who is this?" I said, "(She
     is) So and so. She does not sleep at night
     because she is engaged in prayer." The Prophet
     said disapprovingly: Do (good) deeds which is
     within your capacity as Allah never gets tired of
     giving rewards till you get tired of doing good
     deeds." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 252: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As: 

     Allah's Apostle said to me, "O 'Abdullah! Do not
     be like so and so who used to pray at night and
     then stopped the night prayer." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 253: 

     Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit: 

     The Prophet "Whoever gets up at night and says:
     -- 'La ilaha il-lallah Wahdahu la Sharika lahu
     Lahu-l-mulk, waLahu-l-hamd wahuwa 'ala
     kullishai'in Qadir. Alhamdu lil-lahi wa
     subhanal-lahi wa la-ilaha il-lal-lah wa-l-lahu
     akbar wa la hawla Wala Quwata il-la-bil-lah.'
     (None has the right to be worshipped but Allah.
     He is the Only One and has no partners . For
     Him is the Kingdom and all the praises are due
     for Him. He is Omnipotent. All the praises are
     for Allah. All the glories are for Allah. And none
     has the right to be worshipped but Allah, And
     Allah is Great And there is neither Might nor
     Power Except with Allah). And then says: --
     Allahumma, Ighfir li(O Allah! Forgive me). Or
     invokes (Allah), he will be responded to and if he
     performs ablution (and prays), his prayer will be
     accepted." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 254: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira 

     That once Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Your
     brother, i.e. 'Abdullah bin Rawaha does not say
     obscene (referring to his verses): Amongst us is
     Allah's Apostle, who recites His Book when it
     dawns. He showed us the guidance, after we
     were blind. We believe that whatever he says will
     come true. And he spends his nights in such a
     way as his sides do not touch his bed. While the
     pagans were deeply asleep." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 255: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar said, "In the life-time of the Prophet I
     dreamt that a piece of silk cloth was in my hand
     and it flew with me to whichever part of Paradise
     I wanted. I also saw as if two persons (i.e.
     angels) came to me and wanted to take me to
     Hell. Then an angel met us and told me not to be
     afraid. He then told them to leave me. Hafsa
     narrated one of my dreams to the Prophet and
     the Prophet said, "Abdullah is a good man.
     Would that he offer the night prayer (Tahajjud)!"
     So after that day 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar) started
     offering Tahajjud. The companions of the
     Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to tell him their dreams
     that (Laila-tul-Qadr) was on the 27th of the
     month of Ramadan. The Prophet said, "I see that
     your dreams agree on the last ten nights of
     Ramadan and so whoever is in search of it
     should seek it in the last ten nights of Ramadan." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 256: 

     Narrated 'Aisha; 

     Allah's Apostle offered the 'Isha' prayer (and
     then got up at the Tahajjud time) and offered
     eight Rakat and then offered two Rakat while
     sitting. He then offered two Rakat in between the
     Adhan and Iqama (of the Fajr prayer) and he
     never missed them. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 257: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to lie down on his right side,
     after offering two Rakat (Sunna) of the Fajr
     prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 258: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     After offering the Sunna of the Fajr prayer, the
     Prophet used to talk to me, if I happen to be
     awake; otherwise he would lie down till the
     Iqama call was proclaimed (for the Fajr prayer). 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 259: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     After offering the two Rakat (Sunna) the Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) used to talk to me, if I happen to be
     awake; otherwise he would lie down. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 260: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet was never more regular and
     particular in offering any Nawafil than the two
     Rakat (Sunna) of the Fajr prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 261: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to offer thirteen Rakat in the
     night prayer and on hearing the Adhan for the
     morning prayer, he used to offer two light Rakat. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 262: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to make the two
     Rakat before the Fajr prayer so light that I would
     wonder whether he recited Al-Fatiha (or not). 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 263: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah : 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to teach us the way
     of doing Istikhara (Istikhara means to ask Allah
     to guide one to the right sort of action concerning
     any job or a deed), in all matters as he taught us
     the Suras of the Quran. He said, "If anyone of
     you thinks of doing any job he should offer a two
     Rakat prayer other than the compulsory ones
     and say (after the prayer): -- 'Allahumma inni
     astakhiruka bi'ilmika, Wa astaqdiruka
     bi-qudratika, Wa as'alaka min fadlika al-'azlm
     Fa-innaka taqdiru Wala aqdiru, Wa ta'lamu
     Wala a'lamu, Wa anta 'allamu l-ghuyub.
     Allahumma, in kunta ta'lam anna hadha-l-amra
     Khairun li fi dini wa ma'ashi wa'aqibati amri (or
     'ajili amri wa'ajilihi) Faqdirhu wa yas-sirhu li
     thumma barik li Fihi, Wa in kunta ta'lamu anna
     hadha-lamra shar-run li fi dini wa ma'ashi
     wa'aqibati amri (or fi'ajili amri wa ajilihi) Fasrifhu
     anni was-rifni anhu. Waqdir li al-khaira haithu
     kana Thumma ardini bihi.' (O Allah! I ask
     guidance from Your knowledge, And Power
     from Your Might and I ask for Your great
     blessings. You are capable and I am not. You
     know and I do not and You know the unseen. O
     Allah! If You know that this job is good for my
     religion and my subsistence and in my
     Hereafter--(or said: If it is better for my present
     and later needs)--Then You ordain it for me and
     make it easy for me to get, And then bless me in
     it, and if You know that this job is harmful to me
     In my religion and subsistence and in the
     Hereafter--(or said: If it is worse for my present
     and later needs)--Then keep it away from me
     and let me be away from it. And ordain for me
     whatever is good for me, And make me satisfied
     with it). The Prophet added that then the person
     should name (mention) his need. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 264: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada bin Rabi Al-Ansari; 

     The Prophet said, "If anyone of you enters a
     Mosque, he should not sit until he has offered a
     two-Rakat prayer." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 265: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik 

     Allah's Apostle led us and offered a two Rakat
     prayer and then went away. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 266: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar Abu, 

     I offered with Allah's Apostle a two Rakat
     prayer before the Zuhr prayer and two Rakat
     after the Zuhr prayer, two Rakat after Jumua,
     Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 267: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah : 

     While delivering a sermon, Allah's Apostle said,
     "If anyone of you comes while the Imam is
     delivering the sermon or has come out for it, he
     should offer a two Rakat prayer." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 268: 

     Narrated Mujahid: 

     Somebody came to the house of Ibn 'Umar and
     told him that Allah's Apostles had entered the
     Ka'ba. Ibn 'Umar said, "I went in front of the
     Ka'ba and found that Allah's Apostle had come
     out of the Ka'ba and I saw Bilal standing by the
     side of the gate of the Ka'ba. I said, 'O Bilal!
     Has Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) prayed inside the
     Ka'ba?' Bilal replied in the affirmative. I said,
     'Where (did he pray)?' He replied, '(He prayed)
     Between these two pillars and then he came out
     and offered a two Rakat prayer in front of the
     Ka'ba.' " Abu 'Abdullah said: Abu Huraira said,
     "The Prophet (p.b.u.h) advised me to offer two
     Rakat of Duha prayer (prayer to be offered after
     sunrise and before midday). " Itban (bin Malik)
     said, "Allah's Apostle 

     (p.b.u.h) and Abu Bakr, came to me after sunrise
     and we aligned behind the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and
     offered two Rakat." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 269: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     I offered with the Prophet two Rakat before the
     Zuhr and two Rakat after the Zuhr prayer; two
     Rakat after Maghrib, Isha' and the Jumua
     prayers. Those of the Maghrib and 'Isha' were
     offered in his house. My sister Hafsa told me that
     the Prophet used to offer two light Rakat after
     dawn and it was the time when I never went to
     the Prophet." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 270: 

     Narrated 'Amr: 

     I heard Abu Ash-sha'tha' Jabir saying, "I heard
     Ibn Abbas saying, 'I offered with Allah's Apostle
     eight Rakat (of Zuhr and 'Asr prayers) together
     and seven Rakat (the Maghrib and the 'Isha'
     prayers) together.' " I said, "O Abu Ash-shatha!
     I think he must have prayed the Zuhr late and the
     'Asr early; the 'Isha early and the Maghrib late."
     Abu Ash-sha'tha' said, "I also think so." (See
     Hadith No. 518 Vol. 1). 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 271: 

     Narrated Muwarriq: 

     I asked Ibn 'Umar "Do you offer the Duha
     prayer?" He replied in the negative. I further
     asked, "Did 'Umar use to pray it?" He (Ibn
     'Umar) replied in the negative. I again asked,
     "Did Abu Bakr use to pray it?" He replied in the
     negative. I again asked, "Did the Prophet use to
     pray it?" Ibn 'Umar replied, "I don't think he did."


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 272: 

     Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Laila: 

     Only Um Hani narrated to me that she had seen
     the Prophet offering the Duha prayer. She said,
     "On the day of the conquest of Mecca, the
     Prophet entered my house, took a bath and
     offered eight Rakat (of Duha prayers. I had
     never seen the Prophet offering such a light
     prayer but he performed bowing and prostrations
     perfectly . 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 273: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I never saw the Prophet offering the Duha prayer
     but I always offer it. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 274: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     My friend (the Prophet) advised me to do three
     things and I shall not leave them till I die, these
     are: To fast three days every month, to offer the
     Duha prayer, and to offer Witr before sleeping. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 275t: 

     Narrated Anas bin Sirin: 

     I heard Anas bin Malik al-Ansari saying, "An
     Ansari man, who was very fat, said to the
     Prophet, 'I am unable to present myself for the
     prayer with you.' He prepared a meal for the
     Prophet and invited him to his house. He washed
     one side of a mat with water and the Prophet
     offered two Rakat on it." So and so, the son of
     so and so, the son of Al-Jarud asked Anas, "Did
     the Prophet use to offer the Duha prayer?" Anas
     replied, "I never saw him praying (the Duha
     prayer) except on that day." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 275: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     I remember ten Rakat of Nawafil from the
     Prophet, two Rakat before the Zuhr prayer and
     two after it; two Rakat after Maghrib prayer in
     his house, and two Rakat after 'Isha' prayer in his

     house, and two Rakat before the Fajr prayer and
     at that time nobody would enter the house of the
     Prophet Hafsa told me that the Prophet used to
     offer two Rakat after the call maker had made
     the Adhan and the day had dawned. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 276: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The Prophet never missed four Rakat before the
     Zuhr prayer and two Rakat before the Fajr
     prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 277: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah Al-Muzni: 

     The Prophet said, "Pray before the Maghrib
     (compulsory) prayer." He (said it thrice) and in
     the third time, he said, "Whoever wants to offer it
     can do so." He said so because he did not like
     the people to take it as a tradition. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 278: 

     Narrated Marthad bin 'Abdullah Al-Yazani: 

     I went to 'Uqba bin 'Amir Al-Juhani and said, "Is
     it not surprising that Abi Tamim offers two Rakat
     before the Maghrib prayer?" 'Uqba said, "We
     used to do so in the life-time of Allah's Apostle."
     I asked him, "What prevents you from offering it
     now?" He replied, "Business." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 279: 

     Narrated Mahmud bin Ar-rabi' Al-Ansari, 

     that he remembered Allah's Apostle and he also
     remembered a mouthful of water which he had
     thrown on his face, after taking it from a well that
     was in their house. Mahmud said that he had
     heard Itban bin Malik, who was present with
     Allah's Apostle in the battle of Badr saying, "I
     used to lead my people at Bani Salim in the
     prayer and there was a valley between me and
     those people. Whenever it rained it used to be
     difficult for me to cross it to go to their mosque.
     So I went to Allah's Apostle and said, 'I have
     weak eye-sight and the valley between me and
     my people flows during the rainy season and it
     becomes difficult for me to cross it; I wish you
     would come to my house and pray at a place so
     that I could take that place as a praying place.'
     Allah's Apostle said, 'I will do so.' So Allah's
     Apostle and Abu Bakr came to my house in the
     (next) morning after the sun had risen high.
     Allah's Apostle asked my permission to let him in
     and I admitted him. He did not sit before saying,
     'Where do you want us to offer the prayer in
     your house?' I pointed to the place where I
     wanted him to pray. So Allah's Apostle stood up
     for the prayer and started the prayer with Takbir
     and we aligned in rows behind him; and he
     offered two Rakat, and finished them with
     Taslim, and we also performed Taslim with him. I
     detained him for a meal called "Khazir" which I
     had prepared for him.--("Khazir" is a special
     type of dish prepared from barley flour and meat
     soup)-- 

     When the neighbors got the news that Allah's
     Apostle was in my house, they poured it till there
     were a great number of men in the house. One of
     them said, 'What is wrong with Malik, for I do
     not see him?' One of them replied, 'He is a
     hypocrite and does not love Allah and His
     Apostle.' On that Allah's Apostle said, 'Don't say
     this. Haven't you seen that he said, 'None has the
     right to be worshipped but Allah for Allah's sake
     only.' The man replied, 'Allah and His Apostle
     know better; but by Allah, we never saw him but
     helping and talking with the hypocrites.' Allah's
     Apostle replied, 'No doubt, whoever says. None
     has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and by
     that he wants the pleasures of Allah, then Allah
     will save him from Hell." Mahmud added, "I told
     the above narration to some people, one of
     whom was Ab-u Aiyub, the companion of
     Allah's Apostle in the battle in which he (Ab-u
     Aiyub) died and Yazid bin Mu'aw7ya was their
     leader in Roman Territory. Abu Aiyub
     denounced the narration and said, 'I doubt that
     Allah's Apostle ever said what you have said.' I
     felt that too much, and I vowed to Allah that if I
     remained alive in that holy battle, I would (go to
     Medina and) ask Itban bin Malik if he was still
     living in the mosque of his people. So when he
     returned, I assumed Ihram for Hajj or 'Umra and
     then I proceeded on till I reached Medina. I went
     to Bani Salim and Itban bin Malik, who was by
     then an old blind man, was leading his people in
     the prayer. When he finished the prayer, I
     greeted him and introduced myself to him and
     then asked him about that narration. He told that
     narration again in the same manner as he had
     narrated it the first time." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 280: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar, 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Offer some of your prayers
     in your houses and do not make them graves." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 281: 

     Narrated Quza'a: 

     I heard Abu Said saying four words. He said, "I
     heard the Prophet (saying the following
     narrative)." He had participated in twelve holy
     battles with the Prophet. 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "Do
     not set out on a journey except for three
     Mosques i.e. Al-Masjid-AI-Haram, the Mosque
     of Allah's Apostle , and the Mosque of Al-Aqsa,
     (Mosque of Jerusalem)." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 282: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira 

     Allah's Apostle said, "One prayer in my Mosque
     is better than one thousand prayers in any other
     mosque excepting Al-Masjid-AI-Haram." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 283: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Ibn 'Umar never offered the Duha prayer except
     on two occasions: 

     (1) Whenever he reached Mecca; and he always
     used to reach Mecca in the forenoon. He would
     perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba and then offer
     two Rakat at the rear of Maqam Ibrahim. 

     (2) Whenever he visited Quba, for he used to
     visit it every Saturday. When he entered the
     Mosque, he disliked to leave it without offering a
     prayer. Ibn 'Umar narrated that Allah's Apostle
     used to visit the Mosque of Quba (sometime)
     walking and (sometime) riding. And he (i.e. Ibn
     'Umar) used to say, "I do only what my
     companions used to do and I don't forbid
     anybody to pray at any time during the day or
     night except that one should not intend to pray at
     sunrise or sunset." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 284: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar: 

     Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet used to go to the
     Mosque of Quba every Saturday (sometimes)
     walking and (sometimes) riding." 'Abdullah (Ibn
     'Umar) used to do the same. 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 285: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet used to go to the Mosque of Quba
     (sometimes) walking and sometimes riding.
     Added Nafi (in another narration), "He then
     would offer two Rakat (in the Mosque of
     Quba)." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 286: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid Al-Mazini: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Between my house and the
     pulpit there is a garden of the gardens of
     Paradise." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 287: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Between my house and my
     pulpit there is a garden of the gardens of
     Paradise, and my pulpit is on my fountain tank
     (i.e. Al-Kauthar)." 


Volume 2, Book 21, Number 288: 

     Narrated Qaza'a Maula: 

     (freed slave of) Ziyad: I heard Abu Said
     Al-khudri narrating four things from the Prophet
     and I appreciated them very much. He said,
     conveying the words of the Prophet. 

     (1) "A woman should not go on a two day
     journey except with her husband or a
     Dhi-Mahram. 

     (2) No fasting is permissible on two days:
     'Id-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Adha. 

     (3) No prayer after two prayers, i.e. after the
     Fajr prayer till the sunrises and after the 'Asr
     prayer till the sun sets. 

     (4) Do not prepare yourself for a journey except
     to three Mosques, i.e. Al-Masjid-AI-Haram, the
     Mosque of Aqsa (Jerusalem) and my Mosque." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 22: 

     Actions while Praying 



Volume 2, Book 22, Number 289: 

     Narrated Kuraib Maula Ibn Abbas: 

     'Abdullah bin Abbas said that he had passed a
     night in the house of Maimuna the mother of the
     faithful believers , who was his aunt. He said, "I
     slept across the bed, and Allah's Apostle along
     with his wife slept lengthwise. Allah's Apostle
     slept till mid-night or slightly before or after it.
     Then Allah's Apostle woke up, sat, and removed
     the traces of sleep by rubbing his hands over his
     face. Then he recited the last ten verses of
     Surat-Al Imran (2). Then he went towards a
     hanging leather water-container and performed a
     perfect ablution and then stood up for prayer."
     'Abdullah bin Abbas added, "I got up and did the
     same as Allah's Apostle had done and then went
     and stood by his side. Allah's Apostle then put
     his right hand over my head and caught my right
     ear and twisted it. He offered two Rakat, then
     two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two Rakat, then
     two Rakat, then two Rakat and then offered one
     Raka Witr. Then he lay down till the Muadh-dhin
     came and then he prayed two light Rakat and
     went out and offered the early morning (Fajr)
     prayer." 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 290: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     We used to greet the Prophet while he was
     praying and he used to answer our greetings.
     When we returned from AnNajashi (the ruler of
     Ethiopia), we greeted him, but he did not answer
     us (during the prayer) and (after finishing the
     prayer) he said, "In the prayer one is occupied
     (with a more serious matter)." 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 291: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah 

     the same as No. 290. from the Prophet 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 292: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Arqam: 

     In the life-time of the Prophet we used to speak
     while praying, and one of us would tell his needs
     to his companions, till the verse, 'Guard strictly
     your prayers (2.238) was revealed. After that we
     were ordered to remain silent while praying. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 293: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     The Prophet went out to affect a reconciliation
     between the tribes of Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf and the
     time of the prayer became due; Bilal went to Abu
     Bakr and said, "The Prophet is detained. Will
     you lead the people in the prayer?" Abu Bakr
     replied, "Yes, if you wish." So Bilal pronounced
     the Iqama and Abu Bakr led the prayer. In the
     meantime the Prophet came crossing the rows
     (of the praying people) till he stood in the first
     row and the people started clapping. Abu Bakr
     never looked hither and thither during the prayer
     but when the people clapped too much, he
     looked back and saw the Prophet in the (first)
     row. The Prophet waved him to remain at his
     place, but Abu Bakr raised both his hands and
     sent praises to Allah and then retreated and the
     Prophet went forward and led the prayer. (See
     Hadith No. 295 & 296) 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 294: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud: 

     We used to say the greeting, name and greet
     each other in the prayer. Allah's Apostle heard it
     and said:--"Say, 'At-tahiyyatu lil-lahi
     was-salawatu wat-taiyibatu . Assalamu 'Alaika
     aiyuha-n-Nabiyu wa-rahmatu-l-lahi
     wa-barakatuhu. _ Assalamu alaina wa-'ala
     'ibadi-l-lahi as-salihin.. Ashhadu an la ilaha
     illa-l-lah wa ashhadu anna Muhammadan 'abdu
     hu wa Rasuluh. (All the compliments are for
     Allah and all the prayers and all the good things
     (are for Allah). Peace be on you, O Prophet, and
     Allah's mercy and blessings (are on you). And
     peace be on us and on the good (pious)
     worshipers of Allah. I testify that none has the
     right to be worshipped but Allah and that
     Muhammad is His slave and Apostle.) So, when
     you have said this, then you have surely sent the
     greetings to every good (pious) worship per of
     Allah, whether he be in the Heaven or on the
     Earth . " 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 295: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     The Prophet said, "The saying 'Sub Han Allah' is
     for men and clapping is for women." (If
     something happens in the prayer, the men can
     invite the attention of the Imam by saying "Sub
     Han Allah". And women, by clapping their
     hands). 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 296: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad, 

     The Prophet said, "The saying 'Sub Han Allah' is
     for men and clapping is for women. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 297: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     While Abu Bakr was leading the people in the
     morning prayer on a Monday, the Prophet came
     towards them suddenly having lifted the curtain of
     'Aisha's house, and looked at them as they were
     standing in rows and smiled. Abu Bakr tried to
     come back thinking that Allah's Apostle wanted
     to come out for the prayer. The attention of the
     Muslims was diverted from the prayer because
     they were delighted to see the Prophet. The
     Prophet waved his hand to them to complete
     their prayer, then he went back into the room
     and let down the curtain. The Prophet expired on
     that very day. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 297m: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A woman called her son
     while he was in his hermitage and said, 'O Juraij'
     He said, 'O Allah, my mother (is calling me) and
     (I am offering) my prayer (what shall I do)?' She
     again said, 'O Juraij!' He said again, 'O Allah !
     My mother (is calling me) and (I am offering) my
     prayer (what shall I do)?' She again said, 'O
     Juraij' He again said, 'O Allah! My mother (is
     calling me) and (I am offering) my prayer. (What
     shall I do?)' She said, 'O Allah! Do not let Juraij
     die till he sees the faces of prostitutes.' A
     shepherdess used to come by his hermitage for
     grazing her sheep and she gave birth to a child.
     She was asked whose child that was, and she
     replied that it was from Juraij and that he had
     come out from his hermitage. Juraij said, 'Where
     is that woman who claims that her child is from
     me?' (When she was brought to him along with
     the child), Juraij asked the child, 'O Babus, who
     is your father?' The child replied, 'The shepherd.'
     " (See Hadith No 662. Vol 3). 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 298: 

     Narrated Mu'aiqib: 

     The Prophet talked about a man leveling the
     earth on prostrating, and said, "If you have to do
     so, then do it once." 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 299: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     We used to pray with the Prophet in scorching
     heat, and if someone of us could not put his face
     on the earth (because of the heat) then he would
     spread his clothes and prostrate over them. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 300: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     I used to stretch my legs towards the Qibla of the
     Prophet while he was praying; whenever he
     prostrated he touched me, and I would withdraw
     my legs, and whenever he stood up, I would
     restretch my legs. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 301: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet once offered the prayer and said,
     "Satan came in front of me and tried to interrupt
     my prayer, but Allah gave me an upper hand on
     him and I choked him. No doubt, I thought of
     tying him to one of the pillars of the mosque till
     you get up in the morning and see him. Then I
     remembered the statement of Prophet Solomon,
     'My Lord ! Bestow on me a kingdom such as
     shall not belong to any other after me.' Then
     Allah made him (Satan) return with his head
     down (humiliated)." 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 302: 

     Narrated Al-Azraq bin Qais: 

     We were at Al-Ahwaz fighting the AlHaruriya
     (tribe). While I was at the bank of a river a man
     was praying and the reins of his animal were in
     his hands and the animal was struggling and he
     was following the animal. (Shu'ba, a
     sub-narrator, said that man was Abu Barza
     al-Aslaml). A man from the Khawarij said, "O
     Allah! Be harsh to this sheik." And when the
     sheik (Abu Barza) finished his prayer, he said, "I
     heard your remark. No doubt, I participated with
     Allah's Apostle in six or seven or eight holy
     battles and saw his leniency, and no doubt, I
     would rather retain my animal than let it return to
     its stable, as it would cause me much trouble. " 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 303: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Once the sun eclipsed and Allah's Apostle stood
     up for the prayer and recited a very long Sura
     and when bowed for a long while and then raised
     his head and started reciting another Sura. Then
     he bowed, and after finishing, he prostrated and
     did the same in the second Raka and then said,
     "These (lunar and solar eclipses) are two of the
     signs of Allah and if you see them, pray till the
     eclipse is over. No doubt, while standing at this
     place I saw everything promised to me by Allah
     and I saw (Paradise) and I wanted to pluck a
     bunch (of grapes) therefrom, at the time when
     you saw me stepping forward. No doubt, I saw
     Hell with its different parts destroying each other
     when you saw me retreating and in it I saw 'Amr
     bin Luhai who started the tradition of freeing
     animals (set them free) in the name of idols." 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 304: 

     Narrated Ibn'Umar: 

     The Prophet saw some sputum on the wall facing
     the Qibla of the mosque and became furious with
     the people of the mosque and said, "During the
     prayer, Allah is in front of everyone of you and
     so he should not spit (or said, 'He should not
     expectorate')." Then he got down and scratched
     the sputum with his hand. Ibn 'Umar said (after
     narrating), "If anyone of you has to spit during the
     prayer, he should spit to his left." 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 305: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Whenever anyone of you is in
     prayer, he is speaking in private to his Lord and
     so he should neither spit in front of him nor on his
     right side but to his left side under his left foot." 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 306: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     The people used to offer the prayer with the
     Prophet with their waist-sheets tied round their
     necks because of the shortness of the sheets and
     the women were ordered not to lift their heads till
     the men had sat straight. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 307: 

     Narrated'Abdullah: 

     I used to greet the Prophet while he was in
     prayer and he would return my greeting, but
     when we returned (from Ethiopia) I greeted the
     Prophet (while he was praying) but he did not
     return the greeting, and (after finishing the prayer)
     he said, "In the prayer one is occupied (with a
     more serious matter)." 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 308: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle sent me for some job and when I
     had finished it I returned and came to the
     Prophet and greeted him but he did not return my
     greeting. So I felt so sorry that only Allah knows
     it and I said to myself,, 'Perhaps Allah's Apostle
     is angry because I did not come quickly, then
     again I greeted him but he did not reply. I felt
     even more sorry than I did the first time. Again I
     greeted him and he returned the greeting and
     said, "The thing which prevented me from
     returning the greeting was that I was praying."
     And at that time he was on his Rahila and his
     face was not towards the Qibla. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 309: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad: 

     The news about the differences amongst the
     people of Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf at Quba reached
     Allah's Apostle and so he went to them along
     with some of his companions to affect a
     reconciliation. Allah's Apostle was delayed there
     and the time for the prayer became due. Bilal
     came to Abu Bakr! and said, "O Abu Bakr!
     Allah's Apostle is detained (there) and the time
     for the prayer is due. Will you lead the people in
     prayer?" Abu Bakr replied, "Yes, if you wish."
     So Bilal pronounced the Iqama and Abu Bakr
     went forward and the people said Takbir. In the
     meantime, Allah's Apostle came piercing through
     the rows till he stood in the (first) row and the
     people started clapping. Abu Bakr, would never
     look hither and thither during the prayer but when
     the people clapped much he looked back and
     saw Allah's Apostle. The Prophet beckoned him
     to carry on. Abu Bakr raised both his hands,
     praised Allah and retreated till he stood in the
     row and Allah's Apostle went forward and led
     the people in the prayer. When he had finished
     the prayer, he addressed the people and said, "O
     people! Why did you start clapping when
     something happened to you in the prayer?
     Clapping is for women. Whenever one is
     confronted with something unusual in the prayer
     one should say, 'Sub Han Allah'." Then the
     Prophet looked towards Abu Bakr and asked,
     "What prevented you from leading the prayer
     when I beckoned you to carry on?" Abu Bakr
     replied, "It does not befit the son of Al Quhafa to
     lead the prayer in the presence of Allah's Apostle


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 310: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     It was forbidden to keep the hands on the hips
     during the prayer. (This is narrated by Abu
     Huraira from the Prophet.) 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 311: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     It was forbidden to pray with the hands over
     one's hips. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 312: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith: 

     I offered the 'Asr prayer with the Prophet and
     after finishing the prayer with Taslim he got up
     quickly and went to some of his wives and then
     came out. He noticed the signs of astonishment
     on the faces of the people caused by his speed.
     He then said, "I remembered while I was in my
     prayer that a piece of gold was Lying in my
     house and I disliked that it should remain with us
     throughout the night, and so I have ordered it to
     be distributed." 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 313: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira, 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When the Adhan for the
     prayer is pronounced, then Satan takes to his
     heels passing wind so that he may not hear the
     Adhan and when the Muadh-dhin finishes, he
     comes back; and when the Iqama is pronounced
     he again takes to his heels and when it is finished,
     he again comes back and continues reminding the
     praying person of things that he used not to
     remember when not in prayer till he forgets how
     much he has prayed." Abu Salama bin
     'Abdur-Rahman said, "If anyone of you has such
     a thing (forgetting the number of Rakat he has
     prayed) he should perform two prostrations of
     Sahu (i.e. forgetfulness) while sitting." Abu
     Salama narrates this from Abu Huraira. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 314: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     People say that I narrate too many narrations of
     the Prophet; once I met a man (during the
     life-time of the Prophet) and asked him, "Which
     Sura did Allah's Apostle s recite yesterday in the
     'Isha' prayer?" He said, "I do not know." I said,
     "Did you not attend the prayer?" He said, "Yes,
     (I did)." I said, "I know. He recited such and
     such Sura." 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 315: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina : 

     Allah's Apostle once led us in a prayer and
     offered two Rakat and got up (for the third
     Raka) without sitting (after the second Raka).
     The people also got up with him, and when he
     was about to finish his prayer, we waited for him
     to finish the prayer with Taslim but he said Takbir
     before Taslim and performed two prostrations
     while sitting and then finished the prayer with
     Taslim. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 316: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina : 

     Allah's Apostle got up after the second Raka of
     the Zuhr prayer without sitting in between (the
     second and the third Rakat). When he finished
     the prayer he performed two prostrations (of
     Sahu) and then finished the prayer with Tasllm. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 317: 

     Narrated' Abdullah: 

     Once Allah's Apostle offered five Rakat in the
     Zuhr prayer, and somebody asked him whether
     there was some increase in the prayer. Allah's
     Apostle said, "What is that?" He said, "You have
     offered five Rakat." So Allah's Apostle
     performed two prostrations of Sahu after Taslim.


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 318: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet led us in the 'Asr or the Zuhr prayer
     and finished it with Taslim. Dhul-Yadain said to
     him, "O Allah's Apostle! Has the prayer been
     reduced?" The Prophet asked his companions in
     the affirmative. So Allah's Apostle I offered two
     more Rakat and then performed two prostrations
     (of Sahu). Sad said, "I saw that 'Ursa bin
     Az-Zubair had offered two Rakat in the Maghrib
     prayer and finished it with Taslim. He then talked
     (and when he was informed about it) he
     completed the rest of his prayer and performed
     two prostrations, and said, 'The Prophet prayed
     like this.' " 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 319: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira. 

     Once Allah's Apostle offered two Rakat and
     finished his prayer. So Dhul-Yadain asked him,
     "Has the prayer been reduced or have you
     forgotten?" Allah's Apostle said, "Has
     DhulYadain spoken the truth?" The people
     replied in the affirmative. Then Allah's Apostle
     stood up and offered the remaining two Rakat
     and performed Taslim, and then said Takbir and
     performed two prostrations like his usual
     prostrations, or a bit longer, and then got up. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 320: 

     Narrated Salama bin 'Alqama: 

     I asked Muhammad (bin Sirin) whether
     Tashah-hud should be recited after the two
     prostrations of Sahu. He replied, "It is not
     (mentioned) in Abu Huraira's narration . " 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 321: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet offered one of the evening prayers
     (the sub-narrator Muhammad said, "I think that it
     was most probably the 'Asr prayer") and he
     finished it after offering two Rakat only. He then
     stood near a price of wood in front of the
     Mosque and put his hand over it. Abu Bakr and
     'Umar were amongst those who were present,
     but they dared not talk to him about that
     (because of excessive respect for him), and those
     who were in a hurry went out. They said, "Has
     the prayer been reduced?" A man who was
     called DhulYadain by the Prophet said (to the
     Prophet), "Has the prayer been reduced or have
     you forgotten?" He said, "Neither have I
     forgotten, nor has the prayer been reduced." He
     said, "Certainly you have forgotten." So the
     Prophet offered two more Rakat and performed
     Tashm and then said Takbir and performed a
     prostration of Sahu like his ordinary prostration
     or a bit longer and then raised his head and said
     Takbir and then put his head down and
     performed a prostration like his ordinary
     prostration or a bit longer, and then raised his
     head and said Takbir. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 322: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina Al-Asdi: 

     (the ally of Bani 'Abdul Muttalib) Allah's Apostle
     stood up for the Zuhr prayer and he should have
     sat (after the second Raka but he stood up for
     the third Raka without sitting for Tashah-hud)
     and when he finished the prayer he performed
     two prostrations and said Takbir on each
     prostration while sitting, before ending (the
     prayer) with Taslim; and the people too
     performed the two prostrations with him instead
     of the sitting he forgot. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 323: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When the call for prayer is
     made, Satan takes to his heels passing wind so
     that he may not hear the Adhan and when the call
     is finished he comes back, and when the Iqama is
     pronounced, Satan again takes to his heels, and
     when the Iqama is finished he comes back again
     and tries to interfere with the person and his
     thoughts and say, "Remember this and that
     (which he has not thought of before the prayer)",
     till the praying person forgets how much he has
     prayed. If anyone of you does not remember
     whether he has offered three or four Rakat then
     he should perform two prostrations of Sahu while
     sitting. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 324: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When anyone of you
     stands for the prayers, Satan comes and puts him
     in doubts till he forgets how many Rakat he has
     prayed. So if this happens to anyone of you, he
     should perform two prostrations of Sahu while
     sitting. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 325: 

     Narrated Kuraib: 

     I was sent to Aisha by Ibn Abbas, Al-Miswar
     bin Makhrama and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Azhar .
     They told me to greet her on their behalf and to
     ask her about the offering of the two Rakat after
     the 'Asr prayer and to say to her, "We were
     informed that you offer those two Rakat and we
     were told that the Prophet had forbidden offering
     them." Ibn Abbas said, "I along with 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab used to beat the people whenever
     they offered them." I went to Aisha and told her
     that message. 'Aisha said, "Go and ask Um
     Salama about them." So I returned and informed
     them about her statement. They then told me to
     go to Um Salama with the same question with
     which t sent me to 'Aisha. Um Salama replied, "I
     heard the Prophet forbidding them. Later I saw
     him offering them immediately after he prayed the
     'Asr prayer. He then entered my house at a time
     when some of the Ansari women from the tribe
     of Bani Haram were sitting with me, so I sent my
     slave girl to him having said to her, 'Stand beside
     him and tell him that Um Salama says to you, "O
     Allah's Apostle! I have heard you forbidding the
     offering of these (two Rakat after the 'Asr
     prayer) but I have seen you offering them." If he
     waves his hand then wait for him.' The slave girl
     did that. The Prophet beckoned her with his
     hand and she waited for him. When he had
     finished the prayer he said, "O daughter of Bani
     Umaiya! You have asked me about the two
     Rakat after the 'Asr prayer. The people of the
     tribe of 'Abdul-Qais came to me and made me
     busy and I could not offer the two Rakat after
     the Zuhr prayer. These (two Rakat that I have
     just prayed) are for those (missed) ones. 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 326: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi : 

     The news about the differences amongst the
     people of Bani'Amr bin 'Auf reached Allah's
     Apostle and so he went to them along with some
     of his companions to affect a reconciliation
     between them. Allah's Apostle was delayed
     there, and the time of the prayer was due. Bilal
     went to Abu Bakr and said to him, "Allah's
     Apostle has been delayed (there) and the time of
     prayer is due. So will you lead the people in
     prayer?" Abu Bakr said, "Yes, if you wish." Bilal
     pronounced the Iqama and Abu Bakr, went
     forward and said Takbir for the people. In the
     mean-time Allah's Apostle came crossing the
     rows (of the praying people) and stood in the
     (first) row and the people started clapping. Abu
     Bakr, would never glance side-ways in his prayer
     but when the people clapped much he looked
     back and (saw) Allah's Apostle . Allah's Apostle
     beckoned him to carry on the prayer. Abu Bakr
     raised his hands and thanked Allah, and retreated
     till he reached the (first) row. Allah's Apostle
     went forward and led the people in the prayer.
     When he completed the prayer he faced the
     people and said, "O people! Why did you start
     clapping when something unusual happened to
     you in the prayer? Clapping is only for women.
     So whoever amongst you comes across
     something in the prayer should say,
     'Subhan-Allah' for there is none who will not turn
     round on hearing him saying Subhan-Allah. O
     Ab-u Bakr! What prevented you from leading
     the people in the prayer when I beckoned you to
     do so?" Abu Bakr replied, "How dare the son of
     Abu Quhafa lead the prayer in the presence of
     Allah's Apostle ?" 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 327: 

     Narrated Asma': 

     I went to 'Aisha and she was standing praying
     and the people, too, were standing (praying). So
     I said, "What is the matter with the people?" She
     beckoned with her head towards the sky. 

     I said, "(Is there) a sign?" She nodded intending
     to say, "Yes." 


Volume 2, Book 22, Number 328: 

     Narrated 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet: 

     Allah's Apostle during his illness prayed in his
     house sitting, whereas some people followed him
     standing, but the Prophet beckoned them to sit
     down. On completion of the prayer he said, "The
     Imam is to be followed. So, bow when he bows,
     and raise your head when he raises his head."
     (See Hadith No. 657 Vol 1 for taking the
     verdict). 


 Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 23: 

     Funerals (Al-Janaa'iz) 



Volume 2, Book 23, Number 329: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Someone came to me from
     my Lord and gave me the news (or good tidings)
     that if any of my followers dies worshipping none
     (in any way) along with Allah, he will enter
     Paradise." I asked, "Even if he committed illegal
     sexual intercourse (adultery) and theft?" He
     replied, "Even if he committed illegal sexual
     intercourse (adultery) and theft." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 330: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Anyone who dies
     worshipping others along with Allah will definitely
     enter the Fire." I said, "Anyone who dies
     worshipping none along with Allah will definitely
     enter Paradise." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 331: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     Allah's Apostle ordered us to do seven things
     and forbade us to do other seven. He ordered
     us: 

     to follow the funeral procession. to visit the sick,
     to accept invitations, to help the oppressed, to
     fulfill the oaths, to return the greeting and to reply
     to the sneezer: (saying, "May Allah be merciful
     on you," provided the sneezer says, "All the
     praises are for Allah,"). He forbade us to use
     silver utensils and dishes and to wear golden
     rings, silk (clothes), Dibaj (pure silk cloth), Qissi
     and Istabraq (two kinds of silk cloths). 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 332: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The rights of a
     Muslim on the Muslims are to follow the funeral
     processions, to accept invitation and to reply the
     sneezer. (see Hadith No 331) 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 333: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     Abu Bakr came riding his horse from his dwelling
     place in As-Sunh. He got down from it, entered
     the Mosque and did not speak with anybody till
     he came to me and went direct to the Prophet,
     who was covered with a marked blanket. Abu
     Bakr uncovered his face. He knelt down and
     kissed him and then started weeping and said,
     "My father and my mother be sacrificed for you,
     O Allah's Prophet! Allah will not combine two
     deaths on you. You have died the death which
     was written for you." 

     Narrated Abu Salama from Ibn Abbas : Abu
     Bakr came out and 'Umar , was addressing the
     people, and Abu Bakr told him to sit down but
     'Umar refused. Abu Bakr again told him to sit
     down but 'Umar again refused. Then Abu Bakr
     recited the Tashah-hud (i.e. none has the right to
     be worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is
     Allah's Apostle) and the people attended to Abu
     Bakr and left 'Umar. Abu Bakr said, "Amma
     ba'du, whoever amongst you worshipped
     Muhammad, then Muhammad is dead, but
     whoever worshipped Allah, Allah is alive and will
     never die. Allah said: 'Muhammad is no more
     than an Apostle and indeed (many) Apostles
     have passed away before him ..(up to the)
     grateful.' " (3.144) (The narrator added, "By
     Allah, it was as if the people never knew that
     Allah had revealed this verse before till Abu Bakr
     recited it and then whoever heard it, started
     reciting it ") 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 334: 

     Narrated Kharija bin Zaid bin Thabit: 

     Um Al-'Ala', an Ansari woman who gave the
     pledge of allegiance to the Prophet said to me,
     "The emigrants were distributed amongst us by
     drawing lots and we got in our share 'Uthman bin
     Maz'un. We made him stay with us in our house.
     Then he suffered from a disease which proved
     fatal when he died and was given a bath and was
     shrouded in his clothes, Allah's Apostle came I
     said, 'May Allah be merciful to you, O Abu
     As-Sa'ib! I testify that Allah has honored you'.
     The Prophet said, 'How do you know that Allah
     has honored him?' I replied, 'O Allah's Apostle!
     Let my father be sacrificed for you! On whom
     else shall Allah bestow His honor?' The Prophet
     said, 'No doubt, death came to him. By Allah, I
     too wish him good, but by Allah, I do not know
     what Allah will do with me though I am Al lah's
     Apostle. ' By Allah, I never attested the piety of
     anyone after that." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 335: 

     Narrated Al-Laith as above. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 336: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah : 

     When my father was martyred, I lifted the sheet
     from his face and wept and the people forbade
     me to do so but the Prophet did not forbid me.
     Then my aunt Fatima began weeping and the
     Prophet said, "It is all the same whether you
     weep or not. The angels were shading him
     continuously with their wings till you shifted him
     (from the field). " 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 337: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira, 

     Allah's Apostle informed (the people) about the
     death of An-Najashi on the very day he died. He
     went towards the Musalla (praying place) and
     the people stood behind him in rows. He said
     four Takbirs (i.e. offered the Funeral prayer). 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 338: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Zaid took over the flag and
     was martyred. Then it was taken by Jafar who
     was martyred as well. Then 'Abdullah bin
     Rawaha took the flag but he too was martyred
     and at that time the eyes of Allah's Apostle were
     full of tears. Then Khalid bin Al-Walid took the
     flag without being nominated as a chief (before
     hand) and was blessed with victory." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 339: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas. 

     A person died and Allah's Apostle used to visit
     him. He died at night and (the people) buried him
     at night. In the morning they informed the
     Prophet (about his death). He said, "What
     prevented you from informing me?" They replied,
     "It was night and it was a dark night and so we
     disliked to trouble you." The Prophet went to his
     grave and offered the (funeral) prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 340: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "A Muslim whose three
     children die before the age of puberty will be
     granted Paradise by Allah due to his mercy for
     them." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 341: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id: 

     The women requested the Prophet, "Please fix a
     day for us." So the Prophet preached to them
     and said, "A woman whose three children died
     would be screened from the Hell Fire by them,"
     Hearing that, a woman asked, "If two died?" The
     Prophet replied, "Even two (would screen her
     from the (Hell) Fire. " And Abu Huraira added,
     "Those children should be below the age of
     puberty. " 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 342: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "No Muslim whose three
     children died will go to the Fire except for Allah's
     oath (i.e. everyone has to pass over the bridge
     above the lake of fire)." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 343: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet passed by a woman who was sitting
     and weeping beside a grave and said to her,
     "Fear Allah and be patient." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 344: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya al-Ansariya: 

     Allah's Apostle came to us when his daughter
     died and said, "Wash her thrice or five times or
     more, if you see it necessary, with water and Sidr
     and then apply camphor or some camphor at the
     end; and when you finish, notify me." So when
     we finished it, we informed him and he gave us
     his waist-sheet and told us to shroud the dead
     body in it. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 345: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya 

     Allah's Apostle came to us and we were giving a
     bath to his (dead) daughter and said, "Wash her
     three, five or more times with water and Sidr and
     sprinkle camphor on her at the end; and when
     you finish, notify me." So when we finished, we
     informed him and he gave us his waist-sheet and
     told us to shroud her in it. Aiyub said that Hafsa
     narrated to him a narration similar to that of
     Muhammad in which it was said that the bath
     was to be given for an odd number of times, and
     the numbers 3, 5 or 7 were mentioned. It was
     also said that they were to start with the right side
     and with the parts which were washed in
     ablution, and that Um 'Atiyya also mentioned,
     "We combed her hair and divided them in three
     braids." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 346: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya: 

     Allah's Apostle , concerning his (dead)
     daughter's bath, said, "Start with the right side,
     and the parts which are washed in ablution." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 347: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya : 

     When we washed the deceased daughter of the
     Prophet, he said to us, while we were washing
     her, "Start the bath from the right side and from
     the parts which are washed in ablution." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 348: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya: 

     The daughter of the Prophet expired, and he said
     to us, "Wash her three or five times, or more if
     you see it necessary, and when you finish, notify
     me." So, (when we finished) we informed him
     and he unfastened his waist-sheet and told us to
     shroud her in it. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 349: 

     Narrated Muhammad: 

     Um 'Atiyya said, "One of the daughters of the
     Prophet died and he came out and said, 'Wash
     her three or five times or more, if you think it
     necessary, with water and Sidr, and last of all put
     camphor (or some camphor) and when you
     finish, inform me.' " Um Atiyya added, "When we
     finished we informed him and he gave us his
     waist-sheet and said, 'Shroud her in it.' " And
     Um 'Atiyya (in another narration) added, "The
     Prophet said, 'Wash her three, five or seven
     times or more, if you think it necessary.' " Hafsa
     said that Um 'Atiyya had also said, "We
     entwined her hair into three braids." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 350: 

     Narrated Hafsa bint Sirin: 

     Um 'Atiyya said that they had entwined the hair
     of the daughter of Allah's Apostle in three braids.
     They first undid her hair, washed and then
     entwined it in three braids." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 351: 

     Narrated Ibn Sirin: 

     Um 'Atiyya (an Ansari woman who gave the
     pledge of allegiance to the Prophet ) came to
     Basra to visit her son, but she could not find him.
     She narrated to us, "The Prophet came to us
     while we were giving bath to his (dead) daughter,
     he said: 'Wash her three times, five times or
     more, if you think it necessary, with water and
     Sidr, and last of all put camphor, and when you
     finish, notify me.' " Um 'Atiyya added, "After
     finishing, we informed him and he gave us his
     waist sheet and told us to shroud her in it and did
     not say more than that." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 352: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya: 

     We entwined the hair of the dead daughter of the
     Prophet into three braids. Waki said that Sufyan
     said, "One braid was entwined in front and the
     other two were entwined on the sides of the
     head." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 353: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya: 

     One of the daughters of the Prophet expired and
     he came to us and said, "Wash her with Sidr
     (water) for odd number of times, i.e. three, five
     or more, if you think it necessary, and in the last,
     put camphor or (some camphor on her), and
     when you finish, notify me." So when we finished
     we informed him. He gave his waist-sheet to us
     (to shroud her). We entwined the hair (of the
     deceased girl) in three braids and made them fall
     at her back. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 354: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle was shrouded in three Yemenite
     white Suhuliya (pieces of cloth) of cotton, and in
     them there was neither a shirt nor a turban." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 355: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     While a man was riding (his Mount) in 'Arafat, he
     fell down from it (his Mount) and broke his neck
     (and died). The Prophet said, "Wash him with
     water and Sidr and shroud him in two pieces of
     cloth, and neither perfume him, nor cover his
     head, for he will be resurrected on the Day of
     Resurrection saying, 'Labbaik,' (i.e. like a
     pilgrim)." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 356: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     While a man was at 'Arafat (for Hajj) with
     Allah's Apostle the fell down from his Mount and
     broke his neck (and died). So Allah's Apostle
     said, "Wash him with water and Sidr and shroud
     him in two pieces of cloth and neither perfume
     him nor cover his head, for Allah will resurrect
     him on the Day of Resurrection and he will be
     saying 'Labbaik." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 357: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     A man was killed by his camel while we were
     with the Prophet and he was a Muhrim. So the
     Prophet said, "Wash him with water and Sidr
     and shroud him in two pieces of cloth and neither
     perfume him nor cover his head, for Allah will
     resurrect him on the Day of Resurrection and he
     will be saying 'Labbaik' . " 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 358: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     A man fell from his Mount and died while he was
     with the Prophet at 'Arafat. The Prophet said,
     "Wash him with water and Sidr and shroud him
     in two pieces of cloth and neither perfume him
     nor cover his head, for he will be resurrected on
     the Day of Resurrection saying, 'Labbaik'." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 359: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     When 'Abdullah bin Ubai (the chief of
     hypocrites) died, his son came to the Prophet
     and said, "O Allah's Apostle! Please give me
     your shirt to shroud him in it, offer his funeral
     prayer and ask for Allah's forgiveness for him."
     So Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) gave his shirt to him
     and said, "Inform me (When the funeral is ready)
     so that I may offer the funeral prayer." So, he
     informed him and when the Prophet intended to
     offer the funeral prayer, 'Umar took hold of his
     hand and said, "Has Allah not forbidden you to
     offer the funeral prayer for the hypocrites? The
     Prophet said, "I have been given the choice for
     Allah says: '(It does not avail) Whether you (O
     Muhammad) ask forgiveness for them
     (hypocrites), or do not ask for forgiveness for
     them. Even though you ask for their forgiveness
     seventy times, Allah will not forgive them. (9.80)"
     So the Prophet offered the funeral prayer and on
     that the revelation came: "And never (O
     Muhammad) pray (funeral prayer) for any of
     them (i.e. hypocrites) that dies." (9. 84) 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 360: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet came to (the grave of) 'Abdullah bin
     Ubai after his body was buried. The body was
     brought out and then the Prophet put his saliva
     over the body and clothed it in his shirt. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 361: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet was shrouded in three pieces of
     cloth which were made of Suhul (a type of
     cotton), and neither a shirt nor a turban were
     used. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 362: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle was shrouded in three pieces of
     cloth and neither a shirt nor a turban were used. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 363: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle was shrouded in three pieces of
     cloth which were made of white Suhul and
     neither a shirt nor a turban were used. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 364: 

     Narrated Sad from his father: 

     Once the meal of 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf was
     brought in front of him, and he said, "Mustab bin
     'Umar was martyred and he was better than I,
     and he had nothing except his Burd (a black
     square narrow dress) to be shrouded in. Hamza
     or another person was martyred and he was also
     better than I and he had nothing to be shrouded
     in except his Burd. No doubt, I fear that the
     rewards of my deeds might have been given early
     in this world." Then he started weeping. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 365: 

     Narrated Ibrahim: 

     Once a meal was brought to 'Abdur-Rahman bin
     'Auf and he was fasting. He said, "Mustab bin
     'Umar was martyred and he was better than I
     and was shrouded in his Burd and when his head
     was covered with it, his legs became bare, and
     when his legs were covered his head got
     uncovered. Hamza was martyred and was better
     than I. Now the worldly wealth have been
     bestowed upon us (or said a similar thing). No
     doubt, I fear that the rewards of my deeds might
     have been given earlier in this world." Then he
     started weeping and left his food. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 366: 

     Narrated Khabbab: 

     We emigrated with the Prophet (p.b.u.h) in
     Allah's cause, and so our reward was then surely
     incumbent on Allah. Some of us died and they
     did not take anything from their rewards in this
     world, and amongst them was Mustab bin
     'Umar; and the others were those who got their
     rewards. Mustab bin 'Umar was martyred on the
     day of the Battle of Uhud and we could get
     nothing except his Burd to shroud him in. And
     when we covered his head his feet became bare
     and vice versa. So the Prophet ordered us to
     cover his head only and to put idhkhir (a kind of
     shrub) over his feet. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 367: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     A woman brought a woven Burda (sheet) having
     edging (border) to the Prophet, Then Sahl asked
     them whether they knew what is Burda, they said
     that Burda is a cloak and Sahl confirmed their
     reply. Then the woman said, "I have woven it
     with my own hands and I have brought it so that
     you may wear it." The Prophet accepted it, and
     at that time he was in need of it. So he came out
     wearing it as his waist-sheet. A man praised it
     and said, "Will you give it to me? How nice it is!"
     The other people said, "You have not done the
     right thing as the Prophet is in need of it and you
     have asked for it when you know that he never
     turns down anybody's request." The man replied,
     "By Allah, I have not asked for it to wear it but
     to make it my shroud." Later it was his shroud. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 368: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya: 

     We were forbidden to accompany funeral
     processions but not strictly. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 369: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin: 

     One of the sons of Um 'Atiyya died, and when it
     was the third day she asked for a yellow perfume
     and put it over her body, and said, "We were
     forbidden to mourn for more than three days
     except for our husbands." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 370: 

     Narrated Zainab bint Abi Salama: 

     When the news of the death of Abu Sufyan
     reached from Sham, Um Habiba on the third
     day, asked for a yellow perfume and scented her
     cheeks and forearms and said, "No doubt, I
     would not have been in need of this, had I not
     heard the Prophet saying: "It is not legal for a
     woman who believes in Allah and the Last Day
     to mourn for more than three days for any dead
     person except her husband, for whom she should
     mourn for four months and ten days." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 371: 

     Narrated Zainab bint Abi Salama : 

     I went to Um Habiba, the wife of Prophet, who
     said, "I heard the Prophets saying, 'It is not legal
     for a woman who believes in Allah and the Last
     Day to mourn for any dead person for more than
     three days except for her husband, (for whom
     she should mourn) for four months and ten
     days'." Later I went to Zainab bint Jahsh when
     her brother died; she asked for some scent, and
     after using it she said, "I am not in need of scent
     but I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'It is not legal
     for a woman who believes in Allah and the Last
     Day to mourn for more than three days for any
     dead person except her husband, (for whom she
     should mourn) for four months and ten days.' " 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 372: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet passed by a woman who was
     weeping beside a grave. He told her to fear Allah
     and be patient. She said to him, "Go away, for
     you have not been afflicted with a calamity like
     mine." And she did not recognize him. Then she
     was informed that he was the Prophet . so she
     went to the house of the Prophet and there she
     did not find any guard. Then she said to him, "I
     did not recognize you." He said, "Verily, the
     patience is at the first stroke of a calamity." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 373: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     The daughter of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) sent (a
     messenger) to the Prophet requesting him to
     come as her child was dying (or was gasping),
     but the Prophet returned the messenger and told
     him to convey his greeting to her and say:
     "Whatever Allah takes is for Him and whatever
     He gives, is for Him, and everything with Him has
     a limited fixed term (in this world) and so she
     should be patient and hope for Allah's reward."
     She again sent for him, swearing that he should
     come. The Prophet got up, and so did Sad bin
     'Ubada, Muadh bin Jabal, Ubai bin Ka'b, Zaid
     bin Thabit and some other men. The child was
     brought to Allah's Apostle while his breath was
     disturbed in his chest (the sub-narrator thinks that
     Usama added: ) as if it was a leather water-skin.
     On that the eyes of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) started
     shedding tears. Sad said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     What is this?" He replied, "It is mercy which
     Allah has lodged in the hearts of His slaves, and
     Allah is merciful only to those of His slaves who
     are merciful (to others). 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 374: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     We were (in the funeral procession) of one of the
     daughters of the Prophet and he was sitting by
     the side of the grave. I saw his eyes shedding
     tears. He said, "Is there anyone among you who
     did not have sexual relations with his wife last
     night?" Abu Talha replied in the affirmative. And
     so the Prophet told him to get down in the grave.
     And so he got down in her grave. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 375: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Ubaidullah bin Abi
     Mulaika: 

     One of the daughters of 'Uthman died at Mecca.
     We went to attend her funeral procession. Ibn
     'Umar and Ibn Abbas were also present. I sat in
     between them (or said, I sat beside one of them.
     Then a man came and sat beside me.) 'Abdullah
     bin 'Umar said to 'Amr bin 'Uthman, "Will you
     not prohibit crying as Allah's Apostle has said,
     'The dead person is tortured by the crying of his
     relatives.?" Ibn Abbas said, "Umar used to say
     so." Then he added narrating, "I accompanied
     Umar on a journey from Mecca till we reached
     Al-Baida. There he saw some travelers in the
     shade of a Samura (A kind of forest tree). He
     said (to me), "Go and see who those travelers
     are." So I went and saw that one of them was
     Suhaib. I told this to 'Umar who then asked me
     to call him. So I went back to Suhaib and said to
     him, "Depart and follow the chief of the faithful
     believers." Later, when 'Umar was stabbed,
     Suhaib came in weeping and saying, "O my
     brother, O my friend!" (on this 'Umar said to him,
     "O Suhaib! Are you weeping for me while the
     Prophet said, "The dead person is punished by
     some of the weeping of his relatives?" Ibn Abbas
     added, "When 'Umar died I told all this to Aisha
     and she said, 'May Allah be merciful to Umar.
     By Allah, Allah's Apostle did not say that a
     believer is punished by the weeping of his
     relatives. But he said, Allah increases the
     punishment of a non-believer because of the
     weeping of his relatives." Aisha further added,
     "The Quran is sufficient for you (to clear up this
     point) as Allah has stated: 'No burdened soul will
     bear another's burden.' " (35.18). Ibn Abbas
     then said, "Only Allah makes one laugh or cry."
     Ibn Umar did not say anything after that. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 376: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Once Allah's Apostle
     passed by (the grave of) a Jewess whose
     relatives were weeping over her. He said, "They
     are weeping over her and she is being tortured in
     her grave." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 377: 

     Narrated Abu Burda: 

     That his father said, "When Umar was stabbed,
     Suhaib started crying: O my brother! 'Umar said,
     'Don't you know that the Prophet said: The
     deceased is tortured for the weeping of the
     living'?" 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 378: 

     Narrated Al-Mughira: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Ascribing false
     things to me is not like ascribing false things to
     anyone else. Whosoever tells a lie against me
     intentionally then surely let him occupy his seat in
     Hell-Fire." I heard the Prophet saying, "The
     deceased who is wailed over is tortured for that
     wailing." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 379: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar from his father: 

     The Prophet said, "The deceased is tortured in
     his grave for the wailing done over him." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 380: 

     Narrated Shu'ba: 

     The deceased is tortured for the wailing of the
     living ones over him . 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 381: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah : 

     On the day of the Battle of Uhud, my father was
     brought and he had been mayhemed and was
     placed in front of Allah's Apostle and a sheet
     was over him. I went intending to uncover my
     father but my people forbade me; again I wanted
     to uncover him but my people forbade me.
     Allah's Apostle gave his order and he was shifted
     away. At that time he heard the voice of a crying
     woman and asked, "Who is this?" They said, "It
     is the daughter or the sister of Amr." He said,
     "Why does she weep? (or let her stop weeping),
     for the angels had been shading him with their
     wings till he (i.e. the body of the martyr) was
     shifted away." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 382: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     the Prophet said, "He who slaps his cheeks, tears
     his clothes and follows the ways and traditions of
     the Days of Ignorance is not one of us." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 383: 

     Narrated 'Amir bin Sad bin Abi Waqqas: 

     That his father said, "In the year of the last Hajj
     of the Prophet I became seriously ill and the
     Prophet used to visit me inquiring about my
     health. I told him, 'I am reduced to this state
     because of illness and I am wealthy and have no
     inheritors except a daughter, (In this narration the
     name of 'Amir bin Sad is mentioned and in fact it
     is a mistake; the narrator is 'Aisha bint Sad bin
     Abi Waqqas). Should I give two-thirds of my
     property in charity?' He said, 'No.' I asked,
     'Half?' He said, 'No.' then he added, 'One-third,
     and even one-third is much. You'd better leave
     your inheritors wealthy rather than leaving them
     poor, begging others. You will get a reward for
     whatever you spend for Allah's sake, even for
     what you put in your wife's mouth.' I said, 'O
     Allah's Apostle! Will I be left alone after my
     companions have gone?' He said, 'If you are left
     behind, whatever good deeds you will do will
     up-grade you and raise you high. And perhaps
     you will have a long life so that some people will
     be benefited by you while others will be harmed
     by you. O Allah! Complete the emigration of my
     companions and do not turn them renegades.'
     But Allah's Apostle felt sorry for poor Sad bin
     Khaula as he died in Mecca." (but Sad bin Abi
     Waqqas lived long after the Prophet (p.b.u.h).) 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 384: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "He who slaps the cheeks,
     tears the clothes and follows the tradition of the
     Days of Ignorance is not from us." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 385: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "He who slaps the cheeks,
     tears the clothes and follows the traditions of the
     Days of Ignorance is not from us." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 386: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When the Prophet got the news of the death of
     Ibn Haritha, Ja'far and Ibn Rawaha he sat down
     and looked sad and I was looking at him through
     the chink of the door. A man came and told him
     about the crying of the women of Ja'far. The
     Prophet ordered him to forbid them. The man
     went and came back saying that he had told them
     but they did not listen to him. The Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) said, "Forbid them." So again he went
     and came back for the third time and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! By Allah, they did not listen to
     us at all." ('Aisha added): Allah's Apostle
     ordered him to go and put dust in their mouths. I
     said, (to that man) "May Allah stick your nose in
     the dust (i.e. humiliate you)! You could neither
     (persuade the women to) fulfill the order of
     Allah's Apostle nor did you relieve Allah's
     Apostle from fatigue. " 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 387: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When the reciters of Quran were martyred,
     Allah's Apostle recited Qunut for one month and
     I never saw him (i.e. Allah's Apostle) so sad as
     he was on that day. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 388: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     One of the sons of Abu Talha became sick and
     died and Abu Talha at that time was not at home.
     When his wife saw that he was dead, she
     prepared him (washed and shrouded him) and
     placed him somewhere in the house. When Abu
     Talha came, he asked, "How is the boy?" She
     said, "The child is quiet and I hope he is in
     peace." Abu Talha thought that she had spoken
     the truth. Abu Talha passed the night and in the
     morning took a bath and when he intended to go
     out, she told him that his son had died, Abu
     Talha offered the (morning) prayer with the
     Prophet and informed the Prophet of what
     happened to them. Allah's Apostle said, "May
     Allah bless you concerning your night. (That is,
     may Allah bless you with good offspring)."
     Sufyan said, "One of the Ansar said, 'They (i.e.
     Abu Talha and his wife) had nine sons and all of
     them became reciters of the Quran (by heart).' " 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 389: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "The real patience is at the first
     stroke of a calamity." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 390: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     We went with Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) to the
     blacksmith Abu Saif, and he was the husband of
     the wet-nurse of Ibrahim (the son of the
     Prophet). Allah's Apostle took Ibrahim and
     kissed him and smelled him and later we entered
     Abu Saif's house and at that time Ibrahim was in
     his last breaths, and the eyes of Allah's Apostle
     (p.b.u.h) started shedding tears. 'Abdur Rahman
     bin 'Auf said, "O Allah's Apostle, even you are
     weeping!" He said, "O Ibn 'Auf, this is mercy."
     Then he wept more and said, "The eyes are
     shedding tears and the heart is grieved, and we
     will not say except what pleases our Lord, O
     Ibrahim ! Indeed we are grieved by your
     separation." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 391: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar : 

     Sad bin 'Ubada became sick and the Prophet
     along with 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Auf, Sad bin Abi
     Waqqas and 'Abdullah bin Masud visited him to
     enquire about his health. When he came to him,
     he found him surrounded by his household and
     he asked, "Has he died?" They said, "No, O
     Allah's Apostle." The Prophet wept and when
     the people saw the weeping of Allah's Apostle
     (p.b.u.h) they all wept. He said, "Will you listen?
     Allah does not punish for shedding tears, nor for
     the grief of the heart but he punishes or bestows
     His Mercy because of this." He pointed to his
     tongue and added, "The deceased is punished for
     the wailing of his relatives over him." 'Umar used
     to beat with a stick and throw stones and put
     dust over the faces (of those who used to wail
     over the dead). 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 392: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     When the news of the martyrdom of Zaid bin
     Haritha, Ja'far and 'Abdullah bin Rawaha came,
     the Prophet sat down looking sad, and I was
     looking through the chink of the door. A man
     came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! The women
     of Ja'far," and then he mentioned their crying .
     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) ordered h im to stop them
     from crying. The man went and came back and
     said, "I tried to stop them but they disobeyed."
     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) ordered him for the
     second time to forbid them. He went again and
     came back and said, "They did not listen to me,
     (or "us": the sub-narrator Muhammad bin
     Haushab is in doubt as to which is right). "
     ('Aisha added: The Prophet said, "Put dust in
     their mouths." I said (to that man), "May Allah
     stick your nose in the dust (i.e. humiliate you)."
     By Allah, you could not (stop the women from
     crying) to fulfill the order, besides you did not
     relieve Allah's Apostle from fatigue." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 393: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya: 

     At the time of giving the pledge of allegiance to
     the Prophet one of the conditions was that we
     would not wail, but it was not fulfilled except by
     five women and they are Um Sulaim, Um
     Al-'Ala', the daughter of Abi Sabra (the wife of
     Muadh), and two other women; or the daughter
     of Abi Sabra and the wife of Muadh and another
     woman. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 394: 

     Narrated 'Amir bin Rabi'a:, 

     The Prophet said, "Whenever you see a funeral
     procession, stand up till the procession goes
     ahead of you." Al-Humaidi added, "Till the coffin
     leaves you behind or is put down." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 395: 

     Narrated 'Amir bin Rabi'a: 

     The Prophet said, "If any one of you see a
     funeral procession and he is not going along with
     it, then he should stand and remain standing till he
     gets behind it, or it leaves him behind, or the
     coffin is put down before it goes ahead of him . " 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 396: 

     Narrated Said Al-Maqburi: 

     That his father said, "While we were
     accompanying a funeral procession, Abu Huraira
     got hold of the hand of Marwan and they sat
     down before the coffin was put down. Then Abu
     Said came and took hold of Marwan's hand and
     said, "Get up. By Allah, no doubt this (i.e. Abu
     Huraira) knows that the Prophet forbade us to
     do that." Abu Huraira said, "He (Abu Said) has
     spoken the truth." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 397: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri 

     The Prophet said, "When you see a funeral
     procession, you should stand up, and whoever
     accompanies it should not sit till the coffin is put
     down." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 398: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah : 

     A funeral procession passed in front of us and
     the Prophet stood up and we too stood up. We
     said, 'O Allah's Apostle! This is the funeral
     procession of a Jew." He said, "Whenever you
     see a funeral procession, you should stand up." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 399: 

     Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Laila: 

     Sahl bin Hunaif and Qais bin Sad were sitting in
     the city of Al-Qadisiya. A funeral procession
     passed in front of them and they stood up. They
     were told that funeral procession was of one of
     the inhabitants of the land i.e. of a non-believer,
     under the protection of Muslims. They said, "A
     funeral procession passed in front of the Prophet
     and he stood up. When he was told that it was
     the coffin of a Jew, he said, "Is it not a living
     being (soul)?" 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 400: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri : 

     Allah's Apostle said, When the funeral is ready
     and the men carry it on their shoulders, if the
     deceased was righteous it will say, 'Present me
     (hurriedly),' and if he was not righteous, it will
     say, 'Woe to it (me)! Where are they taking it
     (me)?' Its voice is heard by everything except
     man and if he heard it he would fall unconscious."


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 401: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Hurry up with the dead body
     for if it was righteous, you are forwarding it to
     welfare; and if it was otherwise, then you are
     putting off an evil thing down your necks." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 402: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri 

     The Prophet said, "When a funeral is ready and
     the men carry the deceased on their necks
     (shoulders), if it was pious then it will say,
     'Present me quickly', and if it was not pious, then
     it will say, 'Woe to it (me), where are they taking
     it (me)?' And its voice is heard by everything
     except mankind and if he heard it he would fall
     unconscious." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 403: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle offered the funeral prayer for
     An-Najashi and I was in the second or third row.


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 404: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) informed his companions
     about the death of AnNajashi and then he went
     ahead (to lead the prayer) and the people lined
     up behind him in rows and he said four Takbir. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 405: 

     Narrated Ash-Shaibani: 

     Ash Sha'bi said, "I was informed by a man who
     had seen the Prophet going to a grave that was
     separate from the other graves and he aligned the
     people in rows and said four Takbir." I said, "O
     Abu 'Amr! who narrated (that) to you"? He said,
     "Ibn Abbas. " 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 406: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah : 

     The Prophet said, "Today a pious man from
     Ethiopia (i.e. An Najashi) has expired, come on
     to offer the funeral prayer." (Jabir said): We lined
     up in rows and after that the Prophet led the
     prayer and we were in rows. Jabir added, I was
     in the second row." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 407: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle passed by a grave of a deceased
     who had been buried at night. He said, "When
     was this (deceased) buried?" The people said,
     "Yesterday." He said, "Why did you not inform
     me?" They said, "We buried him when it was
     dark and so we disliked to wake you up." He
     stood up and we lined up behind him. (Ibn
     Abbas said): I was one of them, and the Prophet
     offered the funeral prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 408: 

     Narrated Ash-Shaibani: 

     Ash-Sha'bi said, "Somebody who passed along
     with your Prophet (p.b.u.h) by a grave that was
     separate from the other graves informed me
     (saying), "The Prophet 

     led us (in the prayer) and we aligned behind him."
     We said, "O Abu 'Amr! Who told you this
     narration?" He replied, "Ibn Abbas." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 409: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn Umar was told that Abu Huraira said,
     "Whoever accompanies the funeral procession
     will have a reward equal to one Qirat." Ibn
     'Umar said, "Abu Huraira talks of a too
     enormous reward." Aisha attested Abu Huraira's
     narration and said, "I heard Allah's Apostle
     saying like that." Ibn Umar said, "We have lost
     numerous Qirats." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 410: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     that Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Whoever
     attends the funeral procession till he offers the
     funeral prayer for it, will get a reward equal to
     one Qirat, and whoever accompanies it till burial,
     will get a reward equal to two Qirats." It was
     asked, "What are two Qirats?" He replied, "Like
     two huge mountains." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 411: 

     Narrated 'Amir: 

     Ibn Abbas (who was at that time a boy) said,
     "Allah's Apostle came to a grave and the people
     said, 'He or she was buried yesterday.' " Ibn
     Abbas added, "We aligned behind the Prophet
     and he led the funeral prayer of the deceased." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 412: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle informed about the news of the
     death of An-Najash (King of Ethiopia) on the
     day he expired. He said, "Ask Allah's forgiveness
     for your brother. " Narrated Abu Huraira: The
     Prophet made them align in rows at the Musalla
     and said four Takbir. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 413: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar : 

     The Jew brought to the Prophet a man and a
     woman from amongst them who have committed
     (adultery) illegal sexual intercourse. He ordered
     both of them to be stoned (to death), near the
     place of offering the funeral prayers beside the
     mosque." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 414: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     Aisha said, "The Prophet in his fatal illness said,
     'Allah cursed the Jews and the Christians
     because they took the graves of their Prophets as
     places for praying."' Aisha added, "Had it not
     been for that the grave of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) 

     would have been made prominent but I am afraid
     it might be taken (as a) place for praying. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 415: 

     Narrated Samura bin Jundab: 

     I offered the funeral prayer behind the Prophet
     for a woman who had died during child-birth and
     he stood up by the middle of the coffin. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 416: 

     Narrated Samura bin Jundab 

     I offered the funeral prayer behind the Prophet
     for a woman who had died during child-birth and
     he stood up by the middle of the coffin. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 417: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle informed about the news of the
     death of An-Najash on the day he died. He went
     out with us to the Musalla and we aligned in rows
     and he said four Takbirs for An-Najashi's funeral
     prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 418: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet offered the funeral prayer of
     As-Hama An-Najash and said four Takbir. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 419: 

     Narrated Talha bin 'Abdullah bin 'Auf: 

     I offered the funeral prayer behind Ibn Abbas
     and he recited Al-Fatiha and said, "You should
     know that it (i.e. recitation of Al-Fatiha) is the
     tradition of the Prophet Muhammad. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 420: 

     Narrated Sulaiman Ash-Shaibani: 

     I heard Ash-Sha'bi saying, "I was told by a man
     who had passed with the Prophet (p.b.u.h) by a
     grave that was separate from the other graves
     that he (the Prophet ) led them in the prayer and
     they prayed behind him." I said, "O Abu 'Amr!
     Who narrated that to you?" He replied, "Ibn
     Abbas." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 421: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A black person, a male or a female used to clean
     the Mosque and then died. The Prophet (p.b.u.h)
     did not know about it . One day the Prophet
     remembered him and said, "What happened to
     that person?" The people replied, "O Allah's
     Apostle! He died." He said, "Why did you not
     inform me?" They said, "His story was so and so
     (i.e. regarded him as insignificant)." He said,
     "Show me his grave." He then went to his grave
     and offered the funeral prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 422: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "When a human being is laid in
     his grave and his companions return and he even
     hears their foot steps, two angels come to him
     and make him sit and ask him: What did you use
     to say about this man, Muhammad ? He will say:
     I testify that he is Allah's slave and His Apostle.
     Then it will be said to him, 'Look at your place in
     the Hell-Fire. Allah has given you a place in
     Paradise instead of it.' " The Prophet added,
     "The dead person will see both his places. But a
     non-believer or a hypocrite will say to the angels,
     'I do not know, but I used to say what the
     people used to say! It will be said to him,
     'Neither did you know nor did you take the
     guidance (by reciting the Quran).' Then he will be
     hit with an iron hammer between his two ears,
     and he will cry and that cry will be heard by
     whatever approaches him except human beings
     and jinns." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 423: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The angel of death was sent to Moses and when
     he went to him, Moses slapped him severely,
     spoiling one of his eyes. The angel went back to
     his Lord, and said, "You sent me to a slave who
     does not want to die." Allah restored his eye and
     said, "Go back and tell him (i.e. Moses) to place
     his hand over the back of an ox, for he will be
     allowed to live for a number of years equal to the
     number of hairs coming under his hand." (So the
     angel came to him and told him the same). Then
     Moses asked, "O my Lord! What will be then?"
     He said, "Death will be then." He said, "(Let it
     be) now." He asked Allah that He bring him near
     the Sacred Land at a distance of a stone's throw.
     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Were I there I
     would show you the grave of Moses by the way
     near the red sand hill." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 424: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) offered the funeral prayer
     of a man one night after he was buried, he and
     his companions stood up (for the Prayer). He
     had asked them about him before standing,
     saying, "Who is this?" They said, "He is so and
     so and was buried last night." So all of them
     offered the funeral prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 425: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When the Prophet became ill, some of his wives
     talked about a church which they had seen in
     Ethiopia and it was called Mariya. Um Salma
     and Um Habiba had been to Ethiopia, and both
     of them narrated its (the Church's) beauty and
     the pictures it contained. The Prophet raised his
     head and said, "Those are the people who,
     whenever a pious man dies amongst them, make
     a place of worship at his grave and then they
     make those pictures in it. Those are the worst
     creatures in the Sight of Allah." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 426: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     We were in the funeral procession of the
     daughter of Allah's Apostle and Allah's Apostle
     was sitting near the grave and I saw his eyes full
     of tears. He said, "Is there anyone amongst you
     who did not have sexual relations with his wife
     last night?" Abu Talha replied in the affirmative.
     And so Allah's Apostle told him to get down in
     her grave and he got down in her grave and
     buried her. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 427: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: 

     The Prophet collected every two martyrs of
     Uhud in one piece of cloth, then he would ask,
     "Which of them had (knew) more of the Quran?"
     When one of them was pointed out for him, he
     would put that one first in the grave and say, "I
     will be a witness on these on the Day of
     Resurrection." He ordered them to be buried
     with their blood on their bodies and they were
     neither washed nor was a funeral prayer offered
     for them. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 428: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir: 

     One day the Prophet went out and offered the
     funeral prayers of the martyrs of Uhud and then
     went up the pulpit and said, "I will pave the way
     for you as your predecessor and will be a
     witness on you. By Allah! I see my Fount
     (Kauthar) just now and I have been given the
     keys of all the treasures of the earth (or the keys
     of the earth). By Allah! I am not afraid that you
     will worship others along with Allah after my
     death, but I am afraid that you will fight with one
     another for the worldly things." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 429: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah : 

     The Prophet buried every two martyrs in of
     Uhud in one grave. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 430: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     The Prophet said, "Bury them (i.e. martyrs) with
     their blood." (that was) On the day of the Battle
     of Uhud. He did not get them washed. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 431: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah : 

     Allah's Apostle shrouded every two martyrs of
     Uhud in one piece of cloth and then he would
     ask, "Which of them knew more Quran?" When
     one of them was pointed out he would put him
     first in the grave. He said, "I am a witness on
     these." Then he ordered them to be buried with
     blood on their bodies. Neither did he offer their
     funeral prayer nor did he get them washed. (Jabir
     bin Abdullah added): Allah's Apostle used to ask
     about the martyrs of Uhud as to which of them
     knew more of the Quran." And when one of
     them was pointed out as having more of it he
     would put him first in the grave and then his
     companions. (Jabir added): My father and my
     uncle were shrouded in one sheet. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 432: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah has made Mecca a
     sanctuary (sacred place) and it was a sanctuary
     before me and will be so after me. It was made
     legal for me (to fight in it) for a few hours of the
     day. None is allowed to uproot its thorny shrubs
     or to cut its trees or to chase its game or to pick
     up its fallen things except by a person who
     announces it publicly." On that Al-Abbas said (to
     the Prophet), "Except Al-Idhkhir for our
     goldsmiths and for our graves." And so the
     Prophet added, "Except Al-Idhkhir. " And Abu
     Huraira narrated that the Prophet said, "Except
     Al-Idhkhir for our graves and houses." And Ibn
     Abbas said, "For their goldsmiths and houses." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 433: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle came to Abdullah bin Ubai (a
     hypocrite) after his death and he has been laid in
     his pit (grave). He ordered (that he be taken out
     of the grave) and he was taken out. Then he
     placed him on his knees and threw some of his
     saliva on him and clothed him in his (the
     Prophet's) own shirt. Allah knows better (why he
     did so). 'Abdullah bin Ubai had given his shirt to
     Al-Abbas to wear. Abu Harun said, "Allah's
     Apostle at that time had two shirts and the son of
     'Abdullah bin Ubai said to him, 'O Allah's
     Apostle! Clothe my father in your shirt which has
     been in contact with your skin.' ' Sufyan added,
     "Thus people think that the Prophet clothed
     'Abdullah bin Tubal in his shirt in lieu of what he
     (Abdullah) had done (for Al Abbas, the
     Prophet's uncle.)" 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 434: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     When the time of the Battle of Uhud
     approached, my father called me at night and
     said, "I think that I will be the first amongst the
     companions of the Prophet to be martyred. I do
     not leave anyone after me dearer to me than you,
     except Allah's Apostle's soul and I owe some
     debt and you should repay it and treat your
     sisters favorably (nicely and politely)." So in the
     morning he was the first to be martyred and was
     buried along with another (martyr). I did not like
     to leave him with the other (martyr) so I took him
     out of the grave after six months of his burial and
     he was in the same condition as he was on the
     day of burial, except a slight change near his ear. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 435: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     A man was buried along with my father and I did
     not like it till I took him (i.e. my father) out and
     buried him in a separate grave. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 436: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet collected every two martyrs of
     Uhud (in one grave) and then he would ask,
     "Which of them knew the Quran more?" And if
     one of them was pointed out for him as having
     more knowledge, he would put him first in the
     Lahd. The Prophet said, "I will be a witness on
     these on the Day of Resurrection." Then he
     ordered them to be buried with their blood on
     their bodies and he did not have them washed. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 437: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     'Umar set out along with the Prophet (p.b.u.h)
     with a group of people to Ibn Saiyad till they saw
     him playing with the boys near the hillocks of
     Bani Mughala. Ibn Saiyad at that time was
     nearing his puberty and did not notice (us) until
     the Prophet stroked him with his hand and said
     to him, "Do you testify that I am Allah's
     Apostle?" Ibn Saiyad looked at him and said, "I
     testify that you are the Messenger of illiterates."
     Then Ibn Saiyad asked the Prophet (p.b.u.h),
     "Do you testify that I am Allah's Apostle?" The
     Prophet (p.b.u.h) refuted it and said, "I believe in
     Allah and His Apostles." Then he said (to Ibn
     Saiyad), "What do you think?" Ibn Saiyad
     answered, "True people and liars visit me." The
     Prophet said, "You have been confused as to this
     matter." Then the Prophet said to him, "I have
     kept something (in my mind) for you, (can you
     tell me that?)" Ibn Saiyad said, "It is Al-Dukh
     (the smoke)." (2) The Prophet said, "Let you be
     in ignominy. You cannot cross your limits." On
     that 'Umar, said, "O Allah's Apostle! Allow me
     to chop his head off." The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said,
     "If he is he (i.e. Dajjal), then you cannot
     over-power him, and if he is not, then there is no
     use of murdering him." (Ibn 'Umar added): Later
     on Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) once again went
     along with Ubai bin Ka'b to the date-palm trees
     (garden) where Ibn Saiyad was staying. The
     Prophet (p.b.u.h) wanted to hear something from
     Ibn Saiyad before Ibn Saiyad could see him, and
     the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saw him lying covered with
     a sheet and from where his murmurs were heard.
     Ibn Saiyad's mother saw Allah's Apostle while he
     was hiding himself behind the trunks of the
     date-palm trees. She addressed Ibn Saiyad, "O
     Saf ! (and this was the name of Ibn Saiyad) Here
     is Muhammad." And with that Ibn Saiyad got up.
     The Prophet said, "Had this woman left him (Had
     she not disturbed him), then Ibn Saiyad would
     have revealed the reality of his case. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 438: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     A young Jewish boy used to serve the Prophet
     and he became sick. So the Prophet went to visit
     him. He sat near his head and asked him to
     embrace Islam. The boy looked at his father,
     who was sitting there; the latter told him to obey
     Abu-l-Qasim and the boy embraced Islam. The
     Prophet came out saying: "Praises be to Allah
     Who saved the boy from the Hell-fire." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 439: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     My mother and I were among the weak and
     oppressed. I from among the children, and my
     mother from among the women. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 440: 

     Narrated Ibn Shihab: 

     The funeral prayer should be offered for every
     child even if he were the son of a prostitute as he
     was born with a true faith of Islam (i.e. to
     worship none but Allah Alone). If his parents are
     Muslims, particularly the father, even if his
     mother were a non-Muslim, and if he after the
     delivery cries (even once) before his death (i.e.
     born alive) then the funeral prayer must be
     offered. And if the child does not cry after his
     delivery (i.e. born dead) then his funeral prayer
     should not be offered, and he will be considered
     as a miscarriage. Abu Huraira, narrated that the
     Prophet said, "Every child is born with a true
     faith (i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone) but
     his parents convert him to Judaism or to
     Christianity or to Magainism, as an animal
     delivers a perfect baby animal. Do you find it
     mutilated?" Then Abu Huraira recited the holy
     verses: 'The pure Allah's Islamic nature (true faith
     i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone), with which
     He has created human beings.' " (30.30). 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 441: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Every child is born with a
     true faith of Islam (i.e. to worship none but Allah
     Alone) but his parents convert him to Judaism,
     Christianity or Magainism, as an animal delivers a
     perfect baby animal. Do you find it mutilated?"
     Then Abu Huraira recited the holy verses: "The
     pure Allah's Islamic nature (true faith of Islam)
     (i.e. worshipping none but Allah) with which He
     has created human beings. No change let there
     be in the religion of Allah (i.e. joining none in
     worship with Allah). That is the straight religion
     (Islam) but most of men know, not." (30.30) 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 442: 

     Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab from his father: 

     When the time of the death of Abu Talib
     approached, Allah's Apostle went to him and
     found Abu Jahl bin Hisham and 'Abdullah bin
     Abi Umaiya bin Al-Mughira by his side. Allah's
     Apostle said to Abu Talib, "O uncle! Say: None
     has the right to be worshipped but Allah, a
     sentence with which I shall be a witness (i.e.
     argue) for you before Allah. Abu Jahl and
     'Abdullah bin Abi Umaiya said, "O Abu Talib!
     Are you going to denounce the religion of Abdul
     Muttalib?" Allah's Apostle kept on inviting Abu
     Talib to say it (i.e. 'None has the right to be
     worshipped but Allah') while they (Abu Jahl and
     Abdullah) kept on repeating their statement till
     Abu Talib said as his last statement that he was
     on the religion of Abdul Muttalib and refused to
     say, 'None has the right to be worshipped but
     Allah.' (Then Allah's Apostle said, "I will keep on
     asking Allah's forgiveness for you unless I am
     forbidden (by Allah) to do so." So Allah revealed
     (the verse) concerning him (i.e. It is not fitting for
     the Prophet and those who believe that they
     should invoke (Allah) for forgiveness for pagans
     even though they be of kin, after it has become
     clear to them that they are companions of the fire
     (9.113). 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 443: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet once passed by two graves, and
     those two persons (in the graves) were being
     tortured. He said, "They are being tortured not
     for a great thing (to avoid). One of them never
     saved himself from being soiled with his urine,
     while the other was going about with calumnies
     (to make enmity between friends). He then took
     a green leaf of a date-palm tree split it into two
     pieces and fixed one on each grave. The people
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why have you done
     so?" He replied, "I hope that their punishment
     may be lessened till they (the leaf) become dry." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 444: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     " We were accompanying a funeral procession in
     Baqi-I-Gharqad. The Prophet came to us and
     sat and we sat around him. He had a small stick
     in his hand then he bent his head and started
     scraping the ground with it. He then said, "There
     is none among you, and not a created soul, but
     has place either in Paradise or in Hell assigned
     for him and it is also determined for him whether
     he will be among the blessed or wretched." A
     man said, "O Allah's Apostle! Should we not
     depend on what has been written for us and
     leave the deeds as whoever amongst us is
     blessed will do the deeds of a blessed person
     and whoever amongst us will be wretched, will
     do the deeds of a wretched person?" The
     Prophet said, "The good deeds are made easy
     for the blessed, and bad deeds are made easy
     for the wretched." Then he recited the Verses:--
     "As for him who gives (in charity) and is
     Allah-fearing And believes in the Best reward
     from Allah. " (92.5-6) 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 445: 

     Narrated Thabit bin Ad-Dahhak: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Whoever
     intentionally swears falsely by a religion other
     than Islam, then he is what he has said, (e.g. if he
     says, 'If such thing is not true then I am a Jew,' he
     is really a Jew). And whoever commits suicide
     with piece of iron will be punished with the same
     piece of iron in the Hell Fire." Narrated Jundab
     the Prophet said, "A man was inflicted with
     wounds and he committed suicide, and so Allah
     said: My slave has caused death on himself
     hurriedly, so I forbid Paradise for him." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 446: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira-: 

     The Prophet said, "He who commits suicide by
     throttling shall keep on throttling himself in the
     Hell Fire (forever) and he who commits suicide
     by stabbing himself shall keep on stabbing himself
     in the Hell-Fire." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 447: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab : 

     When 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul died, Allah's
     Apostle (p.b.u.h) was called upon to offer his
     funeral prayer. When Allah's Apostle stood up to
     offer the prayer, I got up quickly and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Are you going to pray for Ibn
     Ubai and he said so and so on such and such
     occasions?" And started mentioning all that he
     had said. Allah's Apostle smiled and said, "O
     'Umar! Go away from me." When I talked too
     much he said, "I have been given the choice and
     so I have chosen (to offer the prayer). Had I
     known that he would be forgiven by asking for
     Allah's forgiveness for more than seventy times,
     surely I would have done so." ('Umar added):
     Allah's Apostle offered his funeral prayer and
     returned and after a short while the two verses of
     Surat Bara' were revealed: i.e. "And never (O
     Muhammad) pray for any of them who dies . . .
     (to the end of the verse) rebellion (9.84)" --
     ('Umar added), "Later I astonished at my daring
     before Allah's Apostle on that day. And Allah
     and His Apostle know better." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 448: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik, : 

     A funeral procession passed and the people
     praised the deceased. The Prophet said, "It has
     been affirmed to him." Then another funeral
     procession passed and the people spoke badly
     of the deceased. The Prophet said, "It has been
     affirmed to him". 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked
     (Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) ), "What has been
     affirmed?" He replied, "You praised this, so
     Paradise has been affirmed to him; and you
     spoke badly of this, so Hell has been affirmed to
     him. You people are Allah's witnesses on earth." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 449: 

     Narrated Abu Al-Aswad: 

     I came to Medina when an epidemic had broken
     out. While I was sitting with 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab a funeral procession passed by and
     the people praised the deceased. 'Umar said, "It
     has been affirmed to him." And another funeral
     procession passed by and the people praised the
     deceased. 'Umar said, "It has been affirmed to
     him." A third (funeral procession) passed by and
     the people spoke badly of the deceased. He
     said, "It has been affirmed to him." I (Abu
     Al-Aswad) asked, "O chief of the believers!
     What has been affirmed?" He replied, "I said the
     same as the Prophet had said, that is: if four
     persons testify the piety of a Muslim, Allah will
     grant him Paradise." We asked, "If three persons
     testify his piety?" He (the Prophet) replied, "Even
     three." Then we asked, "If two?" He replied,
     "Even two." We did not ask him regarding one
     witness. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 450: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib : 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "When a faithful
     believer is made to sit in his grave, then (the
     angels) come to him and he testifies that none has
     the right to be worshipped but Allah and
     Muhammad is Allah's Apostle. And that
     corresponds to Allah's statement: Allah will keep
     firm those who believe with the word that stands
     firm . . . (14.27). 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 451: 

     Narrated Shu'ba: 

     Same as above and added, "Allah will keep firm
     those who believe . . . (14.27) was revealed
     concerning the punishment of the grave." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 452: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet looked at the people of the well (the
     well in which the bodies of the pagans killed in
     the Battle of Badr were thrown) and said, "Have
     you found true what your Lord promised you?"
     Somebody said to him, "You are addressing
     dead people." He replied, "You do not hear
     better than they but they cannot reply." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 453: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "They now realize that what I
     used to tell them was the truth. "And Allah said,
     'Verily! You cannot make the dead to hear (i.e.
     benefit them, and similarly the disbelievers) nor
     can you make the deaf hear. (27.80). 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 454: 

     Narrated Masruq: 

     'Aisha said that a Jewess came to her and
     mentioned the punishment in the grave, saying to
     her, "May Allah protect you from the punishment
     of the grave." 'Aisha then asked Allah's Apostle
     about the punishment of the grave. He said,
     "Yes, (there is) punishment in the grave." 'Aisha
     added, "After that I never saw Allah's Apostle
     but seeking refuge with Allah from the
     punishment in the grave in every prayer he
     prayed." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 455: 

     Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr : 

     Allah's Apostle once stood up delivering a
     sermon and mentioned the trial which people will
     face in the grave. When he mentioned that, the
     Muslims started shouting loudly. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 456: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When (Allah's) slave is put
     in his grave and his companions return and he
     even hears their footsteps, two angels come to
     him and make him sit and ask, 'What did you use
     to say about this man (i.e. Muhammad)?' The
     faithful Believer will say, 'I testify that he is Allah's
     slave and His Apostle.' Then they will say to him,
     'Look at your place in the Hell Fire; Allah has
     given you a place in Paradise instead of it.' So he
     will see both his places." (Qatada said, "We
     were informed that his grave would be made
     spacious." Then Qatada went back to the
     narration of Anas who said;) Whereas a
     hypocrite or a non-believer will be asked, "What
     did you use to say about this man." He will reply,
     "I do not know; but I used to say what the
     people used to say." So they will say to him,
     "Neither did you know nor did you take the
     guidance (by reciting the Quran)." Then he will
     be hit with iron hammers once, that he will send
     such a cry as everything near to him will hear,
     except Jinns and human beings. (See Hadith No.
     422). 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 457: 

     Narrated Abi Aiyub: 

     Once the Prophet went out after sunset and
     heard a dreadful voice, and said, "The Jews are
     being punished in their graves." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 458: 

     Narrated Musa bin 'Uqba: 

     (From the daughter of Khalid bin Sa id bin
     Al-'Asi) who said that she had heard the Prophet
     seeking refuge with Allah from the punishment in
     the grave. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 459: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     Allah's Apostle used to invoke (Allah):
     "Allahumma ini a'udhu bika min 'adhabi-l-Qabr,
     wa min 'adhabi-nnar, wa min fitnati-l-mahya
     wa-lmamat, wa min fitnati-l-masih ad-dajjal. (O
     Allah! I seek refuge with you from the
     punishment in the grave and from the punishment
     in the Hell fire and from the afflictions of life and
     death, and the afflictions of Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal."


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 460: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet once passed by two graves and
     said, "They (the deceased persons in those
     graves) are being tortured not for a great thing to
     avoid." And then added, "Yes, (they are being
     punished for a big sin), for one of them used to
     go about with calumnies while the other never
     saved himself from being soiled with his urine."
     (Ibn Abbas added): Then he took a green leaf of
     a date-palm) and split it into two pieces and fixed
     one piece on each grave and said, "May their
     punishment be abated till these (two pieces) get
     dry." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 461: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar : 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When anyone of you dies,
     he is shown his place both in the morning and in
     the evening. If he is one of the people of
     Paradise; he is shown his place in it, and if he is
     from the people of the Hell-Fire; he is shown his
     place there-in. Then it is said to him, 'This is your
     place till Allah resurrect you on the Day of
     Resurrection." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 462: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri : 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When the funeral is ready
     (for its burial) and the people lift it on their
     shoulders, then if the deceased is a righteous
     person he says, 'Take me ahead,' and if he is not
     a righteous one then he says, 'Woe to it (me)!
     Where are you taking it (me)?' And his voice is
     audible to everything except human beings; and if
     they heard it they would fall down unconscious .
     " 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 463: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "Any Muslim
     whose three children died before the age of
     puberty will be granted Paradise by Allah
     because of His mercy to them." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 464: 

     Narrated Al-Bara': 

     When Ibrahim (the son of Prophet) expired,
     Allah's Apostle said, "There is a wet-nurse for
     him in Paradise." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 465: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) was asked about the
     children of (Mushrikeen) pagans. The Prophet
     replied, "Since Allah created them, He knows
     what sort of deeds they would have done." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 466: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet was asked about the offspring of
     pagans (Mushrakeen); so he said, "Allah knows
     what sort of deeds they would have done." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 467: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Every child is born with a true
     faith of Islam (i.e. to worship none but Allah
     Alone) and his parents convert him to Judaism or
     Christianity or Magianism, as an animal delivers a
     perfect baby animal. Do you find it mutilated?" 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 468: 

     Narrated Samura bin Jundab: 

     Whenever the Prophet finished the (morning)
     prayer, he would face us and ask, "Who amongst
     you had a dream last night?" So if anyone had
     seen a dream he would narrate it. The Prophet
     would say: "Ma sha'a-llah" (An Arabic maxim
     meaning literally, 'What Allah wished,' and it
     indicates a good omen.) One day, he asked us
     whether anyone of us had seen a dream. We
     replied in the negative. The Prophet said, "But I
     had seen (a dream) last night that two men came
     to me, caught hold of my hands, and took me to
     the Sacred Land (Jerusalem). There, I saw a
     person sitting and another standing with an iron
     hook in his hand pushing it inside the mouth of
     the former till it reached the jaw-bone, and then
     tore off one side of his cheek, and then did the
     same with the other side; in the mean-time the
     first side of his cheek became normal again and
     then he repeated the same operation again. I
     said, 'What is this?' They told me to proceed on
     and we went on till we came to a man Lying flat
     on his back, and another man standing at his
     head carrying a stone or a piece of rock, and
     crushing the head of the Lying man, with that
     stone. Whenever he struck him, the stone rolled
     away. 

     The man went to pick it up and by the time he
     returned to him, the crushed head had returned
     to its normal state and the man came back and
     struck him again (and so on). I said, 'Who is
     this?' They told me to proceed on; so we
     proceeded on and passed by a hole like an oven;
     with a narrow top and wide bottom, and the fire
     was kindling underneath that hole. Whenever the
     fire-flame went up, the people were lifted up to
     such an extent that they about to get out of it, and
     whenever the fire got quieter, the people went
     down into it, and there were naked men and
     women in it. I said, 'Who is this?' They told me
     to proceed on. So we proceeded on till we
     reached a river of blood and a man was in it, and
     another man was standing at its bank with stones
     in front of him, facing the man standing in the
     river. Whenever the man in the river wanted to
     come out, the other one threw a stone in his
     mouth and caused him to retreat to his original
     position; and so whenever he wanted to come
     out the other would throw a stone in his mouth,
     and he would retreat to his original position. I
     asked, 'What is this?' They told me to proceed
     on and we did so till we reached a
     well-flourished green garden having a huge tree
     and near its root was sitting an old man with
     some children. (I saw) Another man near the tree
     with fire in front of him and he was kindling it up.
     Then they (i.e. my two companions) made me
     climb up the tree and made me enter a house,
     better than which I have ever seen. In it were
     some old men and young men, women and
     children. 

     Then they took me out of this house and made
     me climb up the tree and made me enter another
     house that was better and superior (to the first)
     containing old and young people. I said to them
     (i.e. my two companions), 'You have made me
     ramble all the night. Tell me all about that I have
     seen.' They said, 'Yes. As for the one whose
     cheek you saw being torn away, he was a liar
     and he used to tell lies, and the people would
     report those lies on his authority till they spread
     all over the world. So, he will be punished like
     that till the Day of Resurrection. 

     The one whose head you saw being crushed is
     the one whom Allah had given the knowledge of
     Quran (i.e. knowing it by heart) but he used to
     sleep at night (i.e. he did not recite it then) and
     did not use to act upon it (i.e. upon its orders
     etc.) by day; and so this punishment will go on till
     the Day of Resurrection. And those you saw in
     the hole (like oven) were adulterers (those men
     and women who commit illegal sexual
     intercourse). And those you saw in the river of
     blood were those dealing in Riba (usury). And
     the old man who was sitting at the base of the
     tree was Abraham and the little children around
     him were the offspring of the people. And the
     one who was kindling the fire was Malik, the
     gate-keeper of the Hell-fire. And the first house
     in which you have gone was the house of the
     common believers, and the second house was of
     the martyrs. I am Gabriel and this is Michael.
     Raise your head.' I raised my head and saw a
     thing like a cloud over me. They said, 'That is
     your place.' I said, 'Let me enter my place.' They
     said, 'You still have some life which you have not
     yet completed, and when you complete (that
     remaining portion of your life) you will then enter
     your place.' " 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 469: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     Aisha said, "I went to Abu Bakr (during his fatal
     illness) and he asked me, 'In how many garments
     was the Prophet shrouded?' She replied, 'In
     three Sahuliya pieces of white cloth of cotton,
     and there was neither a shirt nor a turban among
     them.' Abu Bakr further asked her, 'On which
     day did the Prophet die?' She replied, 'He died
     on Monday.' He asked, 'What is today?' She
     replied, 'Today is Monday.' He added, 'I hope I
     shall die sometime between this morning and
     tonight.' Then he looked at a garment that he was
     wearing during his illness and it had some stains
     of saffron. Then he said, 'Wash this garment of
     mine and add two more garments and shroud me
     in them.' I said, 'This is worn out.' He said, 'A
     living person has more right to wear new clothes
     than a dead one; the shroud is only for the body's
     pus.' He did not die till it was the night of
     Tuesday and was buried before the morning." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 470: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     A man said to the Prophet (p.b.u.h), "My mother
     died suddenly and I thought that if she had lived
     she would have given alms. So, if I give alms
     now on her behalf, will she get the reward?" The
     Prophet replied in the affirmative. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 471: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     During his sickness, Allah's Apostle was asking
     repeatedly, "Where am I today? Where will I be
     tomorrow?" And I was waiting for the day of my
     turn (impatiently). Then, when my turn came,
     Allah took his soul away (in my lap) between my
     chest and arms and he was buried in my house. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 472: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle in his fatal illness said, "Allah
     cursed the Jews and the Christians, for they built
     the places of worship at the graves of their
     prophets." And if that had not been the case,
     then the Prophet's grave would have been made
     prominent before the people. So (the Prophet )
     was afraid, or the people were afraid that his
     grave might be taken as a place for worship. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 473: 

     Narrated Abu Bakr bin 'Aiyash : 

     Sufyan At-Tammar told me that he had seen the
     grave of the Prophet elevated and convex. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 474: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     When the wall fell on them (i.e. graves) during
     the caliphate of Al-Walid bin 'Abdul Malik, the
     people started repairing it, and a foot appeared
     to them. The people got scared and thought that
     it was the foot of the Prophet. No-one could be
     found who could tell them about it till I ('Urwa)
     said to them, "By Allah, this is not the foot of the
     Prophet but it is the foot of Umar." Aisha
     narrated that she made a will to 'Abdullah bin
     Zubair, "Do not bury me with them (the Prophet
     and his two companions) but bury me with my
     companions (wives of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ) in
     Al-Baqi as I would not like to be looked upon as
     better than I really am (by being buried near the
     Prophet)." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 475: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun Al-Audi: 

     I saw 'Umar bin Al-Khattab (when he was
     stabbed) saying, "O 'Abdullah bin 'Umar! Go to
     the mother of the believers Aisha and say, 'Umar
     bin Al-Khattab sends his greetings to you,' and
     request her to allow me to be buried with my
     companions." (So, Ibn 'Umar conveyed the
     message to 'Aisha.) She said, "I had the idea of
     having this place for myself but today I prefer him
     ('Umar) to myself (and allow him to be buried
     there)." When 'Abdullah bin 'Umar returned,
     'Umar asked him, "What (news) do you have?"
     He replied, "O chief of the believers! She has
     allowed you (to be buried there)." On that 'Umar
     said, "Nothing was more important to me than to
     be buried in that (sacred) place. So, when I
     expire, carry me there and pay my greetings to
     her ('Aisha ) and say, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asks
     permission; and if she gives permission, then bury
     me (there) and if she does not, then take me to
     the grave-yard of the Muslims. I do not think any
     person has more right for the caliphate than those
     with whom Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) was always
     pleased till his death. And whoever is chosen by
     the people after me will be the caliph, and you
     people must listen to him and obey him," and
     then he mentioned the name of 'Uthman, 'Ali,
     Talha, Az-Zubair, 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and
     Sad bin Abi Waqqas. 

     By this time a young man from Ansar came and
     said, "O chief of the believers! Be happy with
     Allah's glad tidings. The grade which you have in
     Islam is known to you, then you became the
     caliph and you ruled with justice and then you
     have been awarded martyrdom after all this."
     'Umar replied, "O son of my brother! Would that
     all that privileges will counterbalance (my short
     comings), so that I neither lose nor gain anything.
     I recommend my successor to be good to the
     early emigrants and realize their rights and to
     protect their honor and sacred things. And I also
     recommend him to be good to the Ansar who
     before them, had homes (in Medina) and had
     adopted the Faith. He should accept the good of
     the righteous among them and should excuse
     their wrongdoers. I recommend him to abide by
     the rules and regulations concerning the Dhimmis
     (protectees) of Allah and His Apostle, to fulfill
     their contracts completely and fight for them and
     not to tax (overburden) them beyond their
     capabilities." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 476: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Don't abuse the
     dead, because they have reached the result of
     what they forwarded." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 477: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas.: 

     Abu Lahab, may Allah curse him, once said to
     the Prophet (p.b.u.h), "Perish you all the day." 

     Then the Divine Inspiration came: "Perish the
     hands of Abi Lahab! And perish he!" (111.1). 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 478: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Thy Prophet sent Muadh to Yemen and said,
     "Invite the people to testify that none has the right
     to be worshipped but Allah and I am Allah's
     Apostle, and if they obey you to do so, then
     teach them that Allah has enjoined on them five
     prayers in every day and night (in twenty-four
     hours), and if they obey you to do so, then teach
     them that Allah has made it obligatory for them to
     pay the Zakat from their property and it is to be
     taken from the wealthy among them and given to
     the poor." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 479: 

     Narrated Abu Aiyub: 

     A man said to the Prophet "Tell me of such a
     deed as will make me enter Paradise." The
     people said, "What is the matter with him? What
     is the matter with him?" The Prophet said, "He
     has something to ask. (What he needs greatly)
     The Prophet said: (In order to enter Paradise)
     you should worship Allah and do not ascribe any
     partners to Him, offer prayer perfectly, pay the
     Zakat and keep good relations with your Kith
     and kin." (See Hadith No. 12, Vol 8). 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 480: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A Bedouin came to the Prophet and said, "Tell
     me of such a deed as will make me enter
     Paradise, if I do it." The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said,
     "Worship Allah, and worship none along with
     Him, offer the (five) prescribed compulsory
     prayers perfectly, pay the compulsory Zakat, and
     fast the month of Ramadan." The Bedouin said,
     "By Him, in Whose Hands my life is, I will not do
     more than this." When he (the Bedouin) left, the
     Prophet said, "Whoever likes to see a man of
     Paradise, then he may look at this man." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 481: 

     Narrated Abu Zur'a: 

     from the Prophet the same as above. 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 482: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     A delegation of the tribe of 'Abdul Qais came to
     the Prophet and said, "O Allah's Apostle! We
     are from the tribe of Rabi'a, and the infidels of
     the tribe of Mudar stands between us and you;
     so we cannot come to you except during the
     Sacred Months. Please order us to do something
     (religious deeds) which we may carry out and
     also invite to it our people whom we have left
     behind." The Prophet said, "I order you to do
     four things and forbid you four others: (I order
     you) to have faith in Allah, and confess that none
     has the right to be worshipped but Allah, (and
     the Prophet gestured with his hand like this (i.e.
     one knot) and to offer prayers perfectly and to
     pay the Zakat, and to pay one-fifth of the booty
     in Allah's Cause. And I forbid you to use
     Dubba', Hantam, Naqir and Muzaffat (all these
     are the names of utensils used for preparing
     alcoholic drinks)." 


Volume 2, Book 23, Number 483: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     When Allah's Apostle died and Abu Bakr
     became the caliph some Arabs renegade
     (reverted to disbelief) (Abu Bakr decided to
     declare war against them), 'Umar, said to Abu
     Bakr, "How can you fight with these people
     although Allah's Apostle said, 'I have been
     ordered (by Allah) to fight the people till they
     say: "None has the right to be worshipped but
     Allah, and whoever said it then he will save his
     life and property from me except on trespassing
     the law (rights and conditions for which he will be
     punished justly), and his accounts will be with
     Allah.' " Abu Bakr said, "By Allah! I will fight
     those who differentiate between the prayer and
     the Zakat as Zakat is the compulsory right to be
     taken from the property (according to Allah's
     orders) By Allah! If they refuse to pay me even a
     she-kid which they used to pay at the time of
     Allah's Apostle . I would fight with them for
     withholding it" Then 'Umar said, "By Allah, it was
     nothing, but Allah opened Abu Bakr's chest
     towards the decision (to fight) and I came to
     know that his decision was right." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 24: 

     Obligatory Charity Tax
                 (Zakat) 



Volume 2, Book 24, Number 484: 

     Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah , 

     I gave the pledge of allegiance to the Prophet for
     offering prayer perfectly giving Zakat and giving
     good advice to every Muslim. 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 485: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "(On the Day of Resurrection)
     camels will come to their owner in the best state
     of health they have ever had (in the world), and if
     he had not paid their Zakat (in the world) then
     they would tread him with their feet; and
     similarly, sheep will come to their owner in the
     best state of health they have ever had in the
     world, and if he had not paid their Zakat, then
     they would tread him with their hooves and
     would butt him with their horns." The Prophet
     added, "One of their rights is that they should be
     milked while water is kept in front of them." The
     Prophet added, "I do not want anyone of you to
     come to me on the Day of Resurrection, carrying
     over his neck a sheep that will be bleating. Such
     a person will (then) say, 'O Muhammad! (please
     intercede for me,) I will say to him. 'I can't help
     you, for I conveyed Allah's Message to you.'
     Similarly, I do not want anyone of you to come
     to me carrying over his neck a camel that will be
     grunting. Such a person (then) will say "O
     Muhammad! (please intercede for me)." I will
     say to him, "I can't help you for I conveyed
     Allah's message to you." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 486: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever is made wealthy
     by Allah and does not pay the Zakat of his
     wealth, then on the Day of Resurrection his
     wealth will be made like a bald-headed
     poisonous male snake with two black spots over
     the eyes. The snake will encircle his neck and
     bite his cheeks and say, 'I am your wealth, I am
     your treasure.' " Then the Prophet recited the
     holy verses:-- 'Let not those who withhold . . .'
     (to the end of the verse). (3.180). 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 487: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "No Zakat is due
     on property mounting to less than five Uqiyas (of
     silver), and no Zakat is due on less than five
     camels, and there is no Zakat on less than five
     Wasqs." (A Wasqs equals 60 Sa's) & (1 Sa=3
     K gms App.) 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 488: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Wahab: 

     I passed by a place called Ar-Rabadha and by
     chance I met Abu Dhar and asked him, "What
     has brought you to this place?" He said, "I was in
     Sham and differed with Muawiya on the meaning
     of (the following verses of the Quran): 'They who
     hoard up gold and silver and spend them not in
     the way of Allah.' (9.34). Muawiya said, 'This
     verse is revealed regarding the people of the
     scriptures." I said, It was revealed regarding us
     and also the people of the scriptures." So we had
     a quarrel and Mu'awiya sent a complaint against
     me to 'Uthman. 'Uthman wrote to me to come to
     Medina, and I came to Medina. Many people
     came to me as if they had not seen me before.
     So I told this to 'Uthman who said to me, "You
     may depart and live nearby if you wish." That
     was the reason for my being here for even if an
     Ethiopian had been nominated as my ruler, I
     would have obeyed him . 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 489: 

     Narrated Al-Ahnaf bin Qais: 

     While I was sitting with some people from
     Quraish, a man with very rough hair, clothes, and
     appearance came and stood in front of us,
     greeted us and said, "Inform those who hoard
     wealth, that a stone will be heated in the Hell-fire
     and will be put on the nipples of their breasts till it
     comes out from the bones of their shoulders and
     then put on the bones of their shoulders till it
     comes through the nipples of their breasts the
     stone will be moving and hitting." After saying
     that, the person retreated and sat by the side of
     the pillar, I followed him and sat beside him, and
     I did not know who he was. I said to him, "I
     think the people disliked what you had said." He
     said, "These people do not understand anything,
     although my friend told me." I asked, "Who is
     your friend?" He said, "The Prophet said (to me),
     'O Abu Dhar! Do you see the mountain of
     Uhud?' And on that I (Abu Dhar) started looking
     towards the sun to judge how much remained of
     the day as I thought that Allah's Apostle wanted
     to send me to do something for him and I said,
     'Yes!' He said, 'I do not love to have gold equal
     to the mountain of Uhud unless I spend it all (in
     Allah's cause) except three Dinars (pounds).
     These people do not understand and collect
     worldly wealth. No, by Allah, Neither I ask them
     for worldly benefits nor am I in need of their
     religious advice till I meet Allah, The Honorable,
     The Majestic." ' 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 490: 

     Narrated Ibn Masud: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "There is no envy
     except in two: a person whom Allah has given
     wealth and he spends it in the right way, and a
     person whom Allah has given wisdom (i.e.
     religious knowledge) and he gives his decisions
     accordingly and teaches it to the others." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 491: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If one give in charity what
     equals one date-fruit fro the honestly-earned
     money and Allah accepts only the honestly
     earned money --Allah takes it in His right (hand)
     ar then enlarges its reward for that person (who
     has given it), as anyone of you brings up his baby
     horse, so much s that it becomes as big as a
     mountain 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 492: 

     Narrated Haritha bin Wahab : 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "O people! Give in
     charity as a time will come upon you when a
     person will wander about with his object of
     charity and will not find anybody to accept it, and
     one (who will be requested to take it) will say, "If
     you had brought it yesterday, would have taken
     it, but to-day I am not in need of it." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 493: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The Hour (Day of Judgment)
     will not be established till your wealth increases
     so much so that one will be worried, for no one
     will accept his Zakat and the person to whom he
     will give it will reply, 'I am not in need of it.' " 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 494: 

     Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim: 

     While I was sitting with Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h)
     two person came to him; one of them
     complained about his poverty and the other
     complained about the prevalence of robberies.
     Allah's Apostle said, "As regards stealing and
     robberies, there will shortly come a time when a
     caravan will go to Mecca (from Medina) without
     any guard. And regarding poverty, The Hour
     (Day of Judgment) will not be established till one
     of you wanders about with his object of charity
     and will not find anybody to accept it And (no
     doubt) each one of you will stand in front of
     Allah and there will be neither a curtain nor an
     interpreter between him and Allah, and Allah will
     ask him, 'Did not I give you wealth?' He will
     reply in the affirmative. Allah will further ask,
     'Didn't I send a messenger to you?' And again
     that person will reply in the affirmative Then he
     will look to his right and he will see nothing but
     Hell-fire, and then he will look to his left and will
     see nothing but Hell-fire. And so, any (each one)
     of you should save himself from the fire even by
     giving half of a date-fruit (in charity). And if you
     do not find a half date-fruit, then (you can do it
     through saying) a good pleasant word (to your
     brethren). (See Hadith No. 793 Vol. 4). 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 495: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     Thy Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "A time will come
     upon the people when a person will wander
     about with gold as Zakat and will not find
     anybody to accept it, and one man will be seen
     followed by forty women to be their guardian
     because of scarcity of men and great number of
     women. " 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 496: 

     Narrated Abu Masud: 

     When the verses of charity were revealed, we
     used to work as porters. A man came and
     distributed objects of charity in abundance. And
     they (the people) said, "He is showing off." And
     another man came and gave a sa (a small
     measure of food grains); they said, "Allah is not
     in need of this small amount of charity." And then
     the Divine Inspiration came: "Those who criticize
     such of the believers who give in charity
     voluntarily and those who could not find to give
     in charity except what is available to them."
     (9.79). 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 497: 

     Narrated Abu Masud Al-Ansar: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) ordered us
     to give in charity, we used to go to the market
     and work as porters and get a Mudd (a special
     measure of grain) and then give it in charity.
     (Those were the days of poverty) and to-day
     some of us have one hundred thousand. 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 498: 

     Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim heard the Prophet
     saying: 

     "Save yourself from Hell-fire even by giving half a
     date-fruit in charity." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 499: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     A lady along with her two daughters came to me
     asking (for some alms), but she found nothing
     with me except one date which I gave to her and
     she divided it between her two daughters, and
     did not eat anything herself, and then she got up
     and went away. Then the Prophet came in and I
     informed him about this story. He said,
     "Whoever is put to trial by these daughters and
     he treats them generously (with benevolence)
     then these daughters will act as a shield for him
     from Hell-Fire." (See Hadith No. 24, Vol. 8). 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 500: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man came to the Prophet and asked, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Which charity is the most
     superior in reward?" He replied, "The charity
     which you practice while you are healthy,
     niggardly and afraid of poverty and wish to
     become wealthy. Do not delay it to the time of
     approaching death and then say, 'Give so much
     to such and such, and so much to such and such.'
     And it has already belonged to such and such (as
     it is too late)." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 501: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Some of the wives of the Prophet asked him,
     "Who amongst us will be the first to follow you
     (i.e. die after you)?" He said, "Whoever has the
     longest hand." So they started measuring their
     hands with a stick and Sauda's hand turned out
     to be the longest. (When Zainab bint Jahsh died
     first of all in the caliphate of 'Umar), we came to
     know that the long hand was a symbol of
     practicing charity, so she was the first to follow
     the Prophet and she used to love to practice
     charity. (Sauda died later in the caliphate of
     Muawiya). 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 502: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "A man said that
     he would give something in charity. He went out
     with his object of charity and unknowingly gave it
     to a thief. Next morning the people said that he
     had given his object of charity to a thief. (On
     hearing that) he said, "O Allah! All the praises
     are for you. I will give alms again." And so he
     again went out with his alms and (unknowingly)
     gave it to an adulteress. Next morning the people
     said that he had given his alms to an adulteress
     last night. The man said, "O Allah! All the praises
     are for you. (I gave my alms) to an adulteress. I
     will give alms again." So he went out with his
     alms again and (unknowingly) gave it to a rich
     person. (The people) next morning said that he
     had given his alms to a wealthy person. He said,
     "O Allah! All the praises are for you. (I had given
     alms) to a thief, to an adulteress and to a wealthy
     man." Then someone came and said to him, "The
     alms which you gave to the thief, might make him
     abstain from stealing, and that given to the
     adulteress might make her abstain from illegal
     sexual intercourse (adultery), and that given to
     the wealthy man might make him take a lesson
     from it and spend his wealth which Allah has
     given him, in Allah's cause." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 503: 

     Narrated Ma'n bin Yazid: 

     My grandfather, my father and I gave the pledge
     of allegiance to Allah's Apostle. The Prophet got
     me engaged and then got me married. One day I
     went to the Prophet with a complaint. My father
     Yazid had taken some gold coins for charity and
     kept them with a man in the mosque (to give
     them to the poor) But I went and took them and
     brought them to him (my father). My father said,
     "By Allah! I did not intend to give them to you. "
     I took (the case) to Allah's Apostle . On that
     Allah's Apostle said, "O Yazid! You will be
     rewarded for what you intended. O Man!
     Whatever you have taken is yours." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 504: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Seven people will
     be shaded by Allah under His shade on the day
     when there will be no shade except His. They
     are: 

     (1) a just ruler; 

     (2) a young man who has been brought up in the
     worship of Allah, (i.e. worship Allah (Alone)
     sincerely from his childhood), 

     (3) a man whose heart is attached to the mosque
     (who offers the five compulsory congregational
     prayers in the mosque); 

     (4) two persons who love each other only for
     Allah's sake and they meet and part in Allah's
     cause only; 

     (5) a man who refuses the call of a charming
     woman of noble birth for an illegal sexual
     intercourse with her and says: I am afraid of
     Allah; 

     (6) a person who practices charity so secretly
     that his left hand does not know what his right
     hand has given (i.e. nobody knows how much he
     has given in charity). 

     (7) a person who remembers Allah in seclusion
     and his eyes get flooded with tears." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 505: 

     Narrated Haritha bin Wahab Al-Khuza'i: 

     I heard the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saying, "(O
     people!) Give in charity (for Allah's cause)
     because a time will come when a person will
     carry his object of charity from place to place
     (and he will not find any person to take it) and
     any person whom he shall request to take it, I
     will reply, 'If you had brought it yesterday I
     would have taken it, but today I am not 

     in need of it." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 506: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When a woman gives in
     charity some of the foodstuff (which she has in
     her house) without spoiling it, she will receive the
     reward for what she has spent, and her husband
     will receive the reward because of his earning,
     and the storekeeper will also have a reward
     similar to it. The reward of one will not decrease
     the reward of the others . " 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 507: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "The best charity is
     that which is practiced by a wealthy person. And
     start giving first to your dependents." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 508: 

     Narrated Hakim bin Hizam 

     The Prophet said, "The upper hand is better than
     the lower hand (i.e. he who gives in charity is
     better than him who takes it). One should start
     giving first to his dependents. And the best object
     of charity is that which is given by a wealthy
     person (from the money which is left after his
     expenses). And whoever abstains from asking
     others for some financial help, Allah will give him
     and save him from asking others, Allah will make
     him self-sufficient." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 509: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) while he was on
     the pulpit speaking about charity, to abstain from
     asking others for some financial help and about
     begging others, saying, "The upper hand is better
     than the lower hand. The upper hand is that of
     the giver and the lower (hand) is that of the
     beggar." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 510: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith: 

     Once the Prophet offered the 'Asr prayer and
     then hurriedly went to his house and returned
     immediately. I (or somebody else) asked him (as
     to what was the matter) and he said, "I left at
     home a piece of gold which was from the charity
     and I disliked to let it remain a night in my house,
     so I got it distributed . " 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 511: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet went out for the 'Id prayer on the
     'Id day and offered a two Rakat prayer; and he
     neither offered a prayer before it or after it. Then
     he went towards the women along with Bilal. He
     preached them and ordered them to give in
     charity. And some (amongst the women) started
     giving their fore-arm bangles and ear-rings. 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 512: 

     Narrated Abu Burda bin Abu Musa: 

     that his father said, "Whenever a beggar came to
     Allah's Apostle or he was asked for something,
     he used to say (to his companions), "Help and
     recommend him and you will receive the reward
     for it; and Allah will bring about what He will
     through His Prophet's tongue." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 513: 

     Narrated Asma: 

     The Prophet said to me, "Do not withhold your
     money, (for if you did so) Allah would with-hold
     His blessings from you." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 514: 

     Narrated 'Abda: 

     T he Prophet said, "Do not with-hold your
     money by counting it (i.e. hoarding it), (for if you
     did so), Allah would also with-hold His blessings
     from you." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 515: 

     Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr: 

     that she had gone to the Prophet and he said,
     "Do not shut your money bag; otherwise Allah
     too will with-hold His blessings from you. Spend
     (in Allah's Cause) as much as you can afford. " 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 516: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     Hudhaifa said, "'Umar said, 'Who amongst you
     remembers the statement of Allah's Apostle
     (p.b.u.h) about afflictions'?' I said, 'I know it as
     the Prophet had said it.' 'Umar said, 'No doubt,
     you are bold. How did he say it?' I said, 'A
     man's afflictions (wrong deeds) concerning his
     wife, children and neighbors are expiated by (his)
     prayers, charity, and enjoining good.' (The
     sub-narrator Sulaiman added that he said, 'The
     prayer, charity, enjoining good and forbidding
     evil.') 'Umar said, 'I did not mean that, but I ask
     about that affliction which will spread like the
     waves of the sea.' I said, 'O chief of the
     believers! You need not be afraid of it as there is
     a closed door between you and it.' He asked,
     'Will the door be broken or opened?' I replied,
     'No, it will be broken.' He said, 'Then, if it is
     broken, it will never be closed again?' I replied,
     'Yes.' " Then we were afraid to ask what that
     door was, so we asked Masruq to inquire, and
     he asked Hudhaifa regarding it. Hudhaifa said,
     "The door was 'Umar. "We further asked
     Hudhaifa whether 'Umar knew what that door
     meant. Hudhaifa replied in the affirmative and
     added, "He knew it as one knows that there will
     be a night before the tomorrow morning." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 517: 

     Narrated Hakim bin Hizam: 

     I said to Allah's Apostle, "Before embracing
     Islam I used to do good deeds like giving in
     charity, slave-manumitting, and the keeping of
     good relations with Kith and kin. Shall I be
     rewarded for those deeds?" The Prophet replied,
     "You became Muslim with all those good deeds
     (Without losing their reward)." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 518: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When a woman gives in
     charity from her husband's meals without wasting
     the property of her husband, she will get a
     reward for it, and her husband too will get a
     reward for what he earned and the store-keeper
     will have the reward likewise." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 519: 

     Narrated Abu Musa : 

     The Prophet said, "An honest Muslim
     store-keeper who carries out the orders of his
     master and pays fully what he has been ordered
     to give with a good heart and pays to that person
     to whom he was ordered to pay, is regarded as
     one of the two charitable persons." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 520: 

     Narrate Aisha : 

     The Prophet said, "If a woman gives in charity
     from her husband's house .." The Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) also said, "If a lady gives meals (in
     charity) from her husband's house without
     spoiling her husband's property, she will get a
     reward and her husband will also get a reward
     likewise. The husband will get a reward because
     of his earnings and the woman because of her
     spending." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 521: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "When a woman gives in
     charity from her house meals in Allah's Cause
     without spoiling her husband's property, she will
     get a reward for it, and her husband will also get
     the reward for his earnings and the storekeeper
     will get a reward likewise." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 522: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     The Prophet said, "Every day two angels come
     down from Heaven and one of them says, 'O
     Allah! Compensate every person who spends in
     Your Cause,' and the other (angel) says, 'O
     Allah! Destroy every miser.' " 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 523: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     The Prophet said, "The example of a miser and
     an alms-giver is like the example of two persons
     wearing iron cloaks." Allah's Apostle also said,
     "The example of an alms-giver and a miser is like
     the example of two persons who have two iron
     cloaks on them from their breasts to their collar
     bones, and when the alms-giver wants to give in
     charity, the cloak becomes capacious till it
     covers his whole body to such an extent that it
     hides his fingertips and covers his footprints
     (obliterates his tracks). (1) And when the miser
     wants to spend, it (the iron cloak) sticks and
     every ring gets stuck to its place and he tries to
     widen it, but it did not become wide. 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 524: 

     Narrated Abu Burda: 

     from his father from his grandfather that the
     Prophet said, "Every Muslim has to give in
     charity." The people asked, "O Allah's Prophet!
     If someone has nothing to give, what will he do?"
     He said, "He should work with his hands and
     benefit himself and also give in charity (from what
     he earns)." The people further asked, "If he
     cannot find even that?" He replied, "He should
     help the needy who appeal for help." Then the
     people asked, "If he cannot do that?" He replied,
     "Then he should perform good deeds and keep
     away from evil deeds and this will be regarded as
     charitable deeds." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 525: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya: 

     A sheep was sent to me (Nusaiba Al-Ansariya)
     (in charity) and I sent some of it to 'Aisha. The
     Prophet asked 'Aisha for something to eat.
     'Aisha replied that there was nothing except what
     Nusaiba Al-Ansariya had sent of that sheep. The
     Prophet said to her, "Bring it as it has reached its
     place." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 526: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri : 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There is no Zakat on less
     than five camels and also there is no Zakat on
     less than five Awaq (of silver). (5 Awaq = 22
     Fransa Riyals of Yamen or 200 Dirhams.) And
     there is no Zakat on less than five Awsuq. (A
     special measure of food-grains, and one Wasq
     equals 60 Sa's.) (For gold 20, Dinars i.e. equal
     to 12 Guinea English. No Zakat for less than 12
     Guinea (English) of gold or for silver less than 22
     Fransa Riyals of Yamen.) 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 527: 

     Narrated Abi Sa'id Al-Khudri : 

     I heard the Prophet saying (as above--No. 526
     ..) 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 528: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Abu Bakr wrote to me what Allah had instructed
     His Apostle (p.b.u.h) to do regarding the one
     who had to pay one Bint Makhad (i.e. one
     year-old she-camel) as Zakat, and he did not
     have it but had got Bint Labun (two year old
     she-camel). (He wrote that) it could be accepted
     from him as Zakat, and the collector of Zakat
     would return him 20 Dirhams or two sheep; and
     if the Zakat payer had not a Bint Makhad, but he
     had Ibn Labun (a two year old he-camel) then it
     could be accepted as his Zakat, but he would not
     be paid anything . 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 529: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas : 

     I am a witness that Allah's Apostle offered the Id
     prayer before delivering the sermon and then he
     thought that the women would not be able to
     hear him (because of the distance), so he went to
     them along with Bilal who was spreading his
     garment. The Prophet advised and ordered them
     to give in charity. So the women started giving
     their ornaments (in charity). (The sub-narrator
     Aiyub pointed towards his ears and neck
     meaning that they gave ornaments from those
     places such as ear-rings and necklaces.) 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 530: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Abu Bakr wrote to me what was made
     compulsory by Allah's Apostle and that was
     (regarding the payments of Zakat): Neither the
     property of different people may be taken
     together nor the joint property may be split for
     fear of (paying more, or receiving less) Zakat. (1)


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 531: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Abu Bakr wrote to me what Allah's Apostle has
     made compulsory (regarding Zakat) and this was
     mentioned in it: If a property is equally owned by
     two partners, they should pay the combined
     Zakat and it will be considered that both of them
     have paid their Zakat equally. 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 532: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     A Bedouin asked Allah's Apostle about the
     emigration. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "May
     Allah have mercy on you! The matter of
     emigration is very hard. Have you got camels?
     Do you pay their Zakat?" The Bedouin said,
     "Yes, I have camels and I pay their Zakat." The
     Prophet said, Work beyond the seas and Allah
     will not decrease (waste) any of your good
     deeds." (See Hadith No. 260 Vol. 5). 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 533: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Abu Bakr , wrote to me about the Zakat which
     Allah had ordered His Apostle to observe:
     Whoever had to pay Jahda (Jahda means a
     four-year-old she-camel) as Zakat from his herd
     of camels and he had not got one, and he had
     Hiqqa (three-year-old she-camel), that Hiqqa
     should be accepted from him along with two
     sheep if they were available or twenty Dirhams
     (one Durham equals about 1/4 Saudi Riyal) and
     whoever had to pay Hiqqa as Zakat and he had
     no Hiqqa but had a Jadha, the Jadha should be
     accepted from him, and the Zakat collector
     should repay him twenty Dirhams or two sheep;
     and whoever had to pay Hiqqa as Zakat and he
     had not got one, but had a Bint Labun
     (two-year-old she-camel), it should be accepted
     from him along with two sheep or twenty
     Dirhams; and whoever had to pay Bint Labun
     and had a Hiqqa, that Hiqqa should be accepted
     from him and the Zakat collector should repay
     him twenty Dirhams or two sheep; and whoever
     had to pay Bint Labun and he had not got one
     but had a Bint Makhad (one-year-old she
     camel), that Bint Makhad should be accepted
     from him along with twenty Dirhams or two
     sheep. 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 534: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When Abu Bakr; sent me to (collect the Zakat
     from) Bahrein, he wrote to me the following:--
     (In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
     Merciful). These are the orders for compulsory
     charity (Zakat) which Allah's Apostle had made
     obligatory for every Muslim, and which Allah had
     ordered His Apostle to observe: Whoever
     amongst the Muslims is asked to pay Zakat
     accordingly, he should pay it (to the Zakat
     collector) and whoever is asked more than that
     (what is specified in this script) he should not pay
     it; for twenty-four camels or less, sheep are to be
     paid as Zakat; for every five camels one sheep is
     to be paid, and if there are between twenty-five
     to thirty-five camels, one Bint Makhad is to be
     paid; and if they are between thirty-six to
     forty-five (camels), one Bint Labun is to be paid;
     and if they are between forty-six to sixty
     (camels), one Hiqqa is to be paid; and if the
     number is between sixty-one to seventy-five
     (camels), one Jadh'a is to be paid; and if the
     number is between seventy-six to ninety
     (camels), two Bint Labuns are to be paid; and if
     they are from ninety-one to one-hundred-and
     twenty (camels), two Hiqqas are to be paid; and
     if they are over one-hundred and-twenty
     (camels), for every forty (over
     one-hundred-and-twenty) one Bint Labun is to
     be paid, and for every fifty camels (over
     one-hundred-and-twenty) one Hiqqa is to be
     paid; and who ever has got only four camels, has
     to pay nothing as Zakat, but if the owner of these
     four camels wants to give something, he can. If
     the number of camels increases to five, the owner
     has to pay one sheep as Zakat. As regards the
     Zakat for the (flock) of sheep; if they are
     between forty and one-hundred-and-twenty
     sheep, one sheep is to be paid; and if they are
     between one-hundred-and-twenty to two
     hundred (sheep), two sheep are to be paid; and
     if they are between two-hundred to
     three-hundred (sheep), three sheep are to be
     paid; and for over three-hundred sheep, for
     every extra hundred sheep, one sheep is to be
     paid as Zakat. And if somebody has got less than
     forty sheep, no Zakat is required, but if he wants
     to give, he can. For silver the Zakat is
     one-fortieth of the lot (i.e. 2.5%), and if its value
     is less than two-hundred Dirhams, Zakat is not
     required, but if the owner wants to pay he can.' 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 535: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Abu Bakr wrote to me what Allah had ordered
     His Apostle (about Zakat) which goes: Neither
     an old nor a defected animal, nor a male-goat
     may be taken as Zakat except if the Zakat
     collector wishes (to take it). 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 536: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Abu Bakr said, "By Allah! If they (pay me the
     Zakat and) with-hold even a she-kid which they
     used to pay during the life-time of Allah's
     Apostle, I will fight with them for it." 'Umar said,
     "It was nothing but Allah Who opened Abu
     Bakr's chest towards the decision to fight, and I
     came to know that his decision was right." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 537: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) sent Muadh to
     Yemen, he said (to him), "YOU are going to
     people of a (Divine) Book. First of all invite them
     to worship Allah (alone) and when they come to
     know Allah, inform them that Allah has enjoined
     on them, five prayers in every day and night; and
     if they start offering these prayers, inform them
     that Allah has enjoined on them, the Zakat. And
     it is to be taken from the rich amongst them and
     given to the poor amongst them; and if they obey
     you in that, take Zakat from them and avoid
     (don't take) the best property of the people as
     Zakat." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 538: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri : 

     Allah's Apostle said, "No Zakat is imposed on
     less than five Awsuq of dates; no Zakat is
     imposed on less than five Awaq of silver, and no
     Zakat is imposed on less than five camels." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 539: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     Once I went to him (the Prophet ) and he said,
     "By Allah in Whose Hands my life is (or
     probably said, 'By Allah, except Whom none has
     the right to be worshipped) whoever had camels
     or cows or sheep and did not pay their Zakat,
     those animals will be brought on the Day of
     Resurrection far bigger and fatter than before and
     they will tread him under their hooves, and will
     butt him with their horns, and (those animals will
     come in circle): When the last does its turn, the
     first will start again, and this punishment will go
     on till Allah has finished the judgments amongst
     the people." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 540: 

     Narrated Ishaq bin 'Abdullah bin Al Talha: 

     I heard Anas bin Malik saying, "Abu Talha had
     more property of date-palm trees gardens than
     any other amongst the Ansar in Medina and the
     most beloved of them to him was Bairuha
     garden, and it was in front of the Mosque of the
     Prophet . Allah's Apostle used to go there and
     used to drink its nice water." Anas added,
     "When these verses were revealed:--'By no
     means shall you Attain righteousness unless You
     spend (in charity) of that Which you love. '
     (3.92) Abu Talha said to Allah's Apostle 'O
     Allah's Apostle! Allah, the Blessed, the Superior
     says: By no means shall you attain righteousness,
     unless you spend (in charity) of that which you
     love. And no doubt, Bairuha' garden is the most
     beloved of all my property to me. So I want to
     give it in charity in Allah's Cause. I expect its
     reward from Allah. O Allah's Apostle! Spend it
     where Allah makes you think it feasible.' On that
     Allah's Apostle said, 'Bravo! It is useful property.
     I have heard what you have said (O Abu Talha),
     and I think it would be proper if you gave it to
     your Kith and kin.' Abu Talha said, I will do so,
     O Allah's Apostle.' Then Abu Talha distributed
     that garden amongst his relatives and his
     cousins." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 541: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri 

     On 'Id ul Fitr or 'Id ul Adha Allah's Apostle
     (p.b.u.h) went out to the Musalla. After finishing
     the prayer, he delivered the sermon and ordered
     the people to give alms. He said, "O people!
     Give alms." Then he went towards the women
     and said. "O women! Give alms, for I have seen
     that the majority of the dwellers of Hell-Fire
     were you (women)." The women asked, "O
     Allah's Apostle! What is the reason for it?" He
     replied, "O women! You curse frequently, and
     are ungrateful to your husbands. I have not seen
     anyone more deficient in intelligence and religion
     than you. O women, some of you can lead a
     cautious wise man astray." Then he left. And
     when he reached his house, Zainab, the wife of
     Ibn Masud, came and asked permission to enter
     It was said, "O Allah's Apostle! It is Zainab." He
     asked, 'Which Zainab?" The reply was that she
     was the wife of Ibn Mas'ub. He said, "Yes, allow
     her to enter." And she was admitted. Then she
     said, "O Prophet of Allah! Today you ordered
     people to give alms and I had an ornament and
     intended to give it as alms, but Ibn Masud said
     that he and his children deserved it more than
     anybody else." The Prophet replied, "Ibn Masud
     had spoken the truth. Your husband and your
     children had more right to it than anybody else." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 542: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There is no Zakat either on
     a horse or a slave belonging to a Muslim" 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 543: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira :- 

     The Prophet said,"There is no Zakat either on a
     slave or on a horse belonging to a Muslim. 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 544: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri : 

     Once the Prophet sat on a pulpit and we sat
     around him. Then he said, "The things I am afraid
     of most for your sake (concerning what will befall
     you after me) is the pleasures and splendors of
     the world and its beauties which will be disclosed
     to you." Somebody said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     Can the good bring forth evil?" The Prophet
     remained silent for a while. It was said to that
     person, "What is wrong with you? You are
     talking to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) while he is not
     talking to you." Then we noticed that he was
     being inspired divinely. Then the Prophet wiped
     off his sweat and said, "Where is the questioner?"
     It seemed as if the Prophet liked his question.
     Then he said, "Good never brings forth evil.
     Indeed it is like what grows on the banks of a
     water-stream which either kill or make the
     animals sick, except if an animal eats its fill the
     Khadira (a kind of vegetable) and then faces the
     sun, and then defecates and urinates and grazes
     again. No doubt this wealth is sweet and green.
     Blessed is the wealth of a Muslim from which he
     gives to the poor, the orphans and to needy
     travelers. (Or the Prophet said something similar
     to it) No doubt, whoever takes it illegally will be
     like the one who eats but is never satisfied, and
     his wealth will be a witness against him on the
     Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 545: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Al-Harith: 

     Zainab, the wife of 'Abdullah said, "I was in the
     Mosque and saw the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saying,
     'O women ! Give alms even from your
     ornaments.' " Zainab used to provide for
     'Abdullah and those orphans who were under her
     protection. So she said to 'Abdullah, "Will you
     ask Allah's Apostle whether it will be sufficient
     for me to spend part of the Zakat on you and the
     orphans who are under my protection?" He
     replied "Will you yourself ask Allah's Apostle ?"
     (Zainab added): So I went to the Prophet and I
     saw there an Ansari woman who was standing at
     the door (of the Prophet ) with a similar problem
     as mine. Bilal passed by us and we asked him,
     'Ask the Prophet whether it is permissible for me
     to spend (the Zakat) on my husband and the
     orphans under my protection.' And we requested
     Bilal not to inform the Prophet about us. So Bilal
     went inside and asked the Prophet regarding our
     problem. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) asked, "Who are
     those two?" Bilal replied that she was Zainab.
     The Prophet said, "Which Zainab?" Bilal said,
     "The wife of 'Adullah (bin Masud)." The Prophet
     said, "Yes, (it is sufficient for her) and she will
     receive a double rewards (for that): One for
     helping relatives, and the other for giving Zakat." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 546: 

     Narrated Zainab,: 

     (the daughter of Um Salama) My mother said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I receive a reward if I
     spend for the sustenance of Abu Salama's
     offspring, and in fact they are also my sons?" The
     Prophet replied, "Spend on them and you will get
     a reward for what you spend on them." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 547: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) ordered (a person) to
     collect Zakat, and that person returned and told
     him that Ibn Jamil, Khalid bin Al-Walid, and
     Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib had refused to give
     Zakat." The Prophet said, "What made Ibn Jamll
     refuse to give Zakat though he was a poor man,
     and was made wealthy by Allah and His Apostle
     ? But you are unfair in asking Zakat from Khalid
     as he is keeping his armor for Allah's Cause (for
     Jihad). As for Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib, he is
     the uncle of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) and Zakat
     is compulsory on him and he should pay it
     double." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 548: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Some Ansari persons asked for (something) from
     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) and he gave them. They
     again asked him for (something) and he again
     gave them. And then they asked him and he gave
     them again till all that was with him finished. And
     then he said "If I had anything. I would not keep
     it away from you. (Remember) Whoever
     abstains from asking others, Allah will make him
     contented, and whoever tries to make himself
     self-sufficient, Allah will make him self-sufficient.
     And whoever remains patient, Allah will make
     him patient. Nobody can be given a blessing
     better and greater than patience." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 549: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hand
     my life is, it is better for anyone of you to take a
     rope and cut the wood (from the forest) and
     carry it over his back and sell it (as a means of
     earning his living) rather than to ask a person for
     something and that person may give him or not." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 550: 

     Narrated Az-Zubair bin Al'Awwam: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "It is better for
     anyone of you to take a rope (and cut) and bring
     a bundle of wood (from the forest) over his back
     and sell it and Allah will save his face (from the
     Hell-Fire) because of that, rather than to ask the
     people who may give him or not." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 551: 

     Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair and Said bin
     Al-Musaiyab: 

     Haklm bin Hizam said, "(Once) I asked Allah's
     Apostle (for something) and he gave it to me.
     Again I asked and he gave (it to me). Again I
     asked and he gave (it to me). And then he said,
     "O Hakim! This property is like a sweet fresh
     fruit; whoever takes it without greediness, he is
     blessed in it, and whoever takes it with
     greediness, he is not blessed in it, and he is like a
     person who eats but is never satisfied; and the
     upper (giving) hand is better than the lower
     (receiving) hand." Hakim added, "I said to
     Allah's Apostle , 'By Him (Allah) Who sent you
     with the Truth, I shall never accept anything from
     anybody after you, till I leave this world.' " Then
     Abu Bakr (during his caliphate) called Hakim to
     give him his share from the war booty (like the
     other companions of the Prophet ), he refused to
     accept anything. Then 'Umar (during his
     caliphate) called him to give him his share but he
     refused. On that 'Umar said, "O Muslims! I
     would like you to witness that I offered Hakim
     his share from this booty and he refused to take
     it." So Hakim never took anything from anybody
     after the Prophet till he died. 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 552: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle used to give me something but I
     would say to him, "would you give it to a poorer
     and more needy one than l?" The Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) said to me, "Take it. If you are given
     something from this property, without asking for
     it or having greed for it take it; and if not given,
     do not run for it." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 553: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar 

     The Prophet said, "A man keeps on asking
     others for something till he comes on the Day of
     Resurrection without any piece of flesh on his
     face." The Prophet added, "On the Day of
     Resurrection, the Sun will come near (to, the
     people) to such an extent that the sweat will
     reach up to the middle of the ears, so, when all
     the people are in that state, they will ask Adam
     for help, and then Moses, and then Muhammad
     (p.b.u.h) ." The sub-narrator added "Muhammad
     will intercede with Allah to judge amongst the
     people. He will proceed on till he will hold the
     ring of the door (of Paradise) and then Allah will
     exalt him to Maqam Mahmud (the privilege of
     intercession, etc.). And all the people of the
     gathering will send their praises to Allah. 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 554: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The poor person is not the
     one who asks a morsel or two (of meals) from
     the others, but the poor is the one who has
     nothing and is ashamed to beg from others." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 555: 

     Narrated Ash-sha'bi: 

     The clerk of Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba narrated,
     "Muawiya wrote to Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:
     Write to me something which you have heard
     from the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ." So Al-Mughira
     wrote: I heard the Prophet saying, "Allah has
     hated for you three things: 

     1. Vain talks, (useless talk) that you talk too
     much or about others. 

     2. Wasting of wealth (by extravagance) 

     3. And asking too many questions (in disputed
     religious matters) or asking others for something
     (except in great need). (See Hadith No. 591,
     Vol. Ill) 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 556: 

     Narrated Sad (bin Abi Waqqas) : 

     Allah's Apostle distributed something (from the
     resources of Zakat) amongst a group of people
     while I was sitting amongst them, but he left a
     man whom I considered the best of the lot. So, I
     went up to Allah's Apostle and asked him
     secretly, "Why have you left that person? By
     Allah! I consider him a believer." The Prophet
     said, "Or merely a Muslim (Who surrender to
     Allah)." I remained quiet for a while but could not
     help repeating my question because of what I
     knew about him. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why
     have you left that person? By Allah! I consider
     him a believer. " The Prophet said, "Or merely a
     Muslim." I remained quiet for a while but could
     not help repeating my question because of what I
     knew about him. I said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why
     have you left that person? By Allah! I consider
     him a believer." The Prophet said, "Or merely a
     Muslim." Then Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, "I
     give to a person while another is dearer to me,
     for fear that he may be thrown in the Hell-fire on
     his face (by renegating from Islam)." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 557: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The poor person is not the
     one who goes round the people and ask them for
     a mouthful or two (of meals) or a date or two but
     the poor is that who has not enough (money) to
     satisfy his needs and whose condition is not
     known to others, that others may give him
     something in charity, and who does not beg of
     people." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 558: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira 

     The Prophet said, "No doubt, it is better for a
     person to take a rope and proceed in the
     morning to the mountains and cut the wood and
     then sell it, and eat from this income and give
     alms from it than to ask others for something." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 559: 

     Narrated Abu Humaid As-Sa'idi 

     We took part in the holy battle of Tabuk in the
     company of the Prophet and when we arrived at
     the Wadi-al-Qura, there was a woman in her
     garden. The Prophet asked his companions to
     estimate the amount of the fruits in the garden,
     and Allah's Apostle estimated it at ten Awsuq
     (One Wasaq = 60 Sa's) and 1 Sa'= 3 kg.
     approximately). The Prophet said to that lady,
     "Check what your garden will yield." When we
     reached Tabuk, the Prophet said, "There will be
     a strong wind to-night and so no one should
     stand and whoever has a camel, should fasten it."
     So we fastened our camels. A strong wind blew
     at night and a man stood up and he was blown
     away to a mountain called Taiy, The King of Aila
     sent a white mule and a sheet for wearing to the
     Prophet as a present, and wrote to the Prophet
     that his people would stay in their place (and will
     pay Jizya taxation.) (1) When the Prophet
     reached Wadi-al-Qura he asked that woman
     how much her garden had yielded. She said,
     "Ten Awsuq," and that was what Allah's Apostle
     had estimated. Then the Prophet said, "I want to
     reach Medina quickly, and whoever among you
     wants to accompany me, should hurry up." The
     sub-narrator Ibn Bakkar said something which
     meant: When the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saw Medina
     he said, "This is Taba." And when he saw the
     mountain of Uhud, he said, "This mountain loves
     us and we love it. Shall I tell you of the best
     amongst the Ansar?" They replied in the
     affirmative. He said, "The family of
     Bani-n-Najjar, and then the family of Bani Sa'ida
     or Bani Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj. (The
     above-mentioned are the best) but there is
     goodness in all the families of Ansar." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 560: 

     Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah from his father: 

     The Prophet said, "On a land irrigated by rain
     water or by natural water channels or if the land
     is wet due to a near by water channel Ushr (i.e.
     one-tenth) is compulsory (as Zakat); and on the
     land irrigated by the well, half of an Ushr (i.e.
     one-twentieth) is compulsory (as Zakat on the
     yield of the land)." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 561: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri : 

     The Prophet said, "There is no Zakat on less than
     five Awsuq (of dates), or on less than five
     camels, or on less than five Awaq of silver." (22
     Yameni Riyals Faransa). 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 562: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     Dates used to be brought to Allah's Apostle
     immediately after being plucked. Different
     persons would bring their dates till a big heap
     collected (in front of the Prophet). Once
     Al-Hasan and Al-Husain were playing with these
     dates. One of them took a date and put it in his
     mouth. Allah's Apostle looked at him and took it
     out from his mouth and said, "Don't you know
     that Muhammad's offspring do not eat what is
     given in charity?" 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 563: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet had forbidden the sale of dates till
     they were good (ripe), and when it was asked
     what it meant, the Prophet said, "Till there is no
     danger of blight." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 564: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah : 

     The Prophet had forbidden the sale of fruits till
     they were ripe (free from blight). 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 565: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of fruits until
     they were ripe. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) added, "It
     means that they become red ." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 566: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Umar bin Al-Khattab gave a horse in charity in
     Allah's Cause and later he saw it being sold in the
     market and intended to purchase it. Then he
     went to the Prophet and asked his permission.
     The Prophet said, "Do not take back what you
     have given in charity." For this reason, Ibn 'Umar
     never purchased the things which he had given in
     charity, and in case he had purchased something
     (unknowingly) he would give it in charity again. 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 567: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     Once I gave a horse in Allah's Cause (in charity)
     but that person did not take care of it. I intended
     to buy it, as I thought he would sell it at a low
     price. So, I asked the Prophet (p.b.u.h) about it.
     He said, "Neither buy, nor take back your alms
     which you have given, even if the seller were
     willing to sell it for one Dirham, for he who takes
     back his alms is like the one who swallows his
     own vomit." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 568: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira : 

     Al-Hasan bin 'Ali took a date from the dates
     given in charity and put it in his mouth. The
     Prophet said, "Expel it from your mouth. Don't
     you know that we do not eat a thing which is
     given in charity?" 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 569: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas : 

     The Prophet saw a dead sheep which had been
     given in charity to a freed slavegirl of Maimuna,
     the wife of the Prophet . The Prophet said, "Why
     don't you get the benefit of its hide?" They said,
     "It is dead." He replied, "Only to eat (its meat) is
     illegal." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 570: 

     Narrated Al-Aswad: 

     'Aisha intended to buy Barira (a slave-girl) in
     order to manumit her and her masters intended to
     put the condition that her Al-wala would be for
     them. 'Aisha mentioned that to the Prophet who
     said to her, "Buy her, as the "Wala" is for the
     manumitted." Once some meat was presented to
     the Prophet and 'Aisha said to him, "This (meat)
     was given in charity to Barira." He said, "It is an
     object of charity for Barira but a gift for us." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 571: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiyya Al-Ansariya : 

     The Prophet went to 'Aisha and asked her
     whether she had something (to eat). She replied
     that she had nothing except the mutton (piece)
     which Nusaiba (Um 'Atiyya) had sent to us
     (Buraira) in charity." The Prophet said, "It has
     reached its place and now it is not a thing of
     charity but a gift for us." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 572: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Some meat was presented to the Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) and it had been given to Barira (the
     freed slave-girl of Aisha) in charity. He said,
     "This meat is a thing of charity for Barira but it is
     a gift for us." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 573: 

     Narrated Abu Ma'bad,: 

     (the slave of Ibn Abbas) Allah's Apostle said to
     Muadh when he sent him to Yemen, "You will go
     to the people of the Scripture. So, when you
     reach there, invite them to testify that none has
     the right to be worshipped but Allah, and that
     Muhammad is His Apostle. And if they obey you
     in that, tell them that Allah has enjoined on them
     five prayers in each day and night. And if they
     obey you in that tell them that Allah has made it
     obligatory on them to pay the Zakat which will
     be taken from the rich among them and given to
     the poor among them. If they obey you in that,
     then avoid taking the best of their possessions,
     and be afraid of the curse of an oppressed
     person because there is no screen between his
     invocation and Allah." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 574i: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa : 

     Whenever a person came to the Prophet with his
     alms, the Prophet would say, "O Allah! Send
     your Blessings upon so and so." My father went
     to the Prophet with his alms and the Prophet
     said, "O Allah! Send your blessings upon the
     offspring of Abu Aufa." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 574f: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira 

     The Prophet said, "A man from Bani Israel asked
     someone from Bani Israel to give him a loan of
     one thousand Dinars and the later gave it to him.
     The debtor went on a voyage (when the time for
     the payment of the debt became due) but he did
     not find a boat, so he took a piece of wood and
     bored it and put 1000 diners in it and threw it
     into the sea. The creditor went out and took the
     piece of wood to his family to be used as
     fire-wood." (See Hadith No. 488 B, Vol. 3).
     And the Prophet narrated the narration (and
     said), "When he sawed the wood, he found his
     money." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 575: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira 

     Allah's Apostle said, "There is no compensation
     for one killed or wounded by an animal or by
     falling in a well, or because of working in mines;
     but Khumus is compulsory on Rikaz." 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 576: 

     Narrated Abu Humaid Al-Sa'idi: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) appointed a man called
     Ibn Al-Lutbiya, from the tribe of Al-Asd to
     collect Zakat from Bani Sulaim. When he
     returned, (after collecting the Zakat) the Prophet
     checked the account with him. 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 577: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Some people from 'Uraina tribe came to Medina
     and its climate did not suit them, so Allah's
     Apostle (p.b.u.h) allowed them to go to the herd
     of camels (given as Zakat) and they drank their
     milk and urine (as medicine) but they killed the
     shepherd and drove away all the camels. So
     Allah's Apostle sent (men) in their pursuit to
     catch them, and they were brought, and he had
     their hands and feet cut, and their eyes were
     branded with heated pieces of iron and they
     were left in the Harra (a stony place at Medina)
     biting the stones. (See Hadith No. 234, Vol. 1) 


Volume 2, Book 24, Number 578: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik 

     took 'Abdullah bin Abu Talha to Allah's Apostle
     to perform Tahnik for him. (Tahnik was a custom
     among the Muslims that whenever a child was
     born they used to take it to the Prophet who
     would chew a piece of date and put a part of its
     juice in the child's mouth). I saw the Prophet and
     he had an instrument for branding in his hands
     and was branding the camels of Zakat. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 25: 

     Obligatory Charity Tax
  After Ramadaan (Zakat ul
                    Fitr) 



Volume 2, Book 25, Number 579: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle enjoined the payment of one Sa'
     of dates or one Sa' of barley as Zakat-ul-Fitr on
     every Muslim slave or free, male or female,
     young or old, and he ordered that it be paid
     before the people went out to offer the 'Id
     prayer. (One Sa' = 3 Kilograms approx.) 


Volume 2, Book 25, Number 580: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle made it incumbent on all the slave
     or free Muslims, male or female, to pay one Sa'
     of dates or barley as Zakat-ul-Fitr. 


Volume 2, Book 25, Number 581: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     We used to give one Sa' of barley as
     Sadaqatul-Fitr (per head). 


Volume 2, Book 25, Number 582: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     We used to give one Sa' of meal or one Sa' of
     barley or one Sa' of dates, or one Sa' of cottage
     cheese or one Sa' of Raisins (dried grapes) as
     Zakat-ul-Fitr. 


Volume 2, Book 25, Number 583: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar 

     The Prophet ordered (Muslims) to give one Sa'
     of dates or one Sa' of barley as Zakat-ul-Fitr.
     The people rewarded two Mudds of wheat as
     equal to that. 


Volume 2, Book 25, Number 584: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri: 

     In the life-time of the Prophet we used to give
     one Sa' of food or one Sa' of dates or one Sa' of
     barley or one Sa' of Raisins (dried grapes) as
     Sadaqat-ul-Fitr. And when Muawiya became the
     Caliph and the wheat was (available in
     abundance) he said, "I think (observe) that one
     Mudd (of wheat) equals two Mudds (of any of
     the above mentioned things). 


Volume 2, Book 25, Number 585: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet ordered the people to pay
     Zakat-ul-Fitr before going to the 'Id prayer. 


Volume 2, Book 25, Number 586: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     In the life-time of Allah's Apostle , we used to
     give one Sa' of food (edible things) as
     Sadaqat-ul-Fit,r (to the poor). Our food used to
     be either of barley, raisins (dried grapes), cottage
     cheese or dates. 


Volume 2, Book 25, Number 587: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet made incumbent
     on every male or female, free man or slave, the
     payment of one Sa' of dates or barley as
     Sadaqat-ul-Fitr (or said Sadaqa-Ramadan)."
     The people then substituted half Sa' of wheat for
     that. Ibn 'Umar used to give dates (as
     Sadaqat-ulFitr). Once there was scarcity of
     dates in Medina and Ibn 'Umar gave barley.
     'And Ibn 'Umar used to give Sadaqat-ul-Fitr for
     every young and old person. He even used to
     give on behalf of my children. Ibn 'Umar used to
     give Sadaqatul-Fitr to those who had been
     officially appointed for its collection. People used
     to give Sadaqat-ul-Fitr (even) a day or two
     before the 'Id. 


Volume 2, Book 25, Number 588: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle has made Sadaqatul-Fitr
     obligatory, (and it was), either one Sa' of barley
     or one Sa' of dates (and its payment was
     obligatory) on young and old people, and on free
     men as well as on slaves. 

Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 26: 

       Pilgrimmage (Hajj) 



Volume 2, Book 26, Number 589: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas : 

     Al-Fadl (his brother) was riding behind Allah's
     Apostle and a woman from the tribe of Khath'am
     came and Al-Fadl started looking at her and she
     started looking at him. The Prophet turned
     Al-Fadl's face to the other side. The woman
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! The obligation of Hajj
     enjoined by Allah on His devotees has become
     due on my father and he is old and weak, and he
     cannot sit firm on the Mount; may I perform Hajj
     on his behalf?" The Prophet replied, "Yes, you
     may." That happened during the Hajj-al-Wida
     (of the Prophet ). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 590: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     I saw that Allah's Apostle used to ride on his
     Mount at Dhul Hulaifa and used to start saying,
     "Labbaik" when the Mount stood upright. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 591: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah : 

     that Allah's Apostle started saying, "Labbaik"
     from Dhul-Hulaifa when his Mount stood upright
     carrying him . 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 592: 

     Narrated Thumama bin 'Abdullah bin Anas: 

     Anas performed the Hajj on a pack-saddle and
     he was not a miser. Anas said, "Allah's Apostle 

     performed Hajj on a pack-saddle and the same
     Mount was carrying his baggage too." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 593: 

     Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad: 

     'Aisha said, "O Allah's Apostle! You performed
     'Umra but I did not." He said, "O
     'Abdur-Rahman! Go along with your sister and
     let her perform 'Umra from Tan'im."
     'Abdur-Rahman made her ride over the
     pack-saddle of a she-camel and she performed
     'Umra. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 594: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet was asked, "Which is the best
     deed?" He said, "To believe in Allah and His
     Apostle." He was then asked, "Which is the next
     (in goodness)?" He said, "To participate in Jihad
     in Allah's Cause." He was then asked, "Which is
     the next?" He said, "To perform Hajj-Mabrur. " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 595: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the mother of the faithful believers) I said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! We consider Jihad as the best
     deed." The Prophet said, "The best Jihad (for
     women) is Hajj Mabrur. " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 596: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Whoever performs
     Hajj for Allah's pleasure and does not have
     sexual relations with his wife, and does not do
     evil or sins then he will return (after Hajj free
     from all sins) as if he were born anew." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 597: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Jubair: 

     I went to visit 'Abdullah bin 'Umar at his house
     which contained many tents made of cotton cloth
     and these were encircled with Suradik (part of
     the tent). I asked him from where, should one
     assume Ihram for Umra. He said, "Allah's
     Apostle had fixed as Miqat (singular of Mawaqit)
     Qarn for the people of Najd, Dhul-Hulaifa for
     the people of Medina, and Al-Juhfa for the
     people of Sham." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 598: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The people of Yemen used to come for Hajj and
     used not to bring enough provisions with them
     and used to say that they depend on Allah. On
     their arrival in Medina they used to beg the
     people, and so Allah revealed, "And take a
     provision (with you) for the journey, but the best
     provision is the fear of Allah." (2.197). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 599: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) made Dhul-Huiaifa as
     the Miqat for the people of Medina; Al-Juhfa for
     the people of Sham; Qarn-al-Manazil for the
     people of Najd; and Yalamlam for the people of
     Yemen; and these Mawaqit are for the people at
     those very places, and besides them for those
     who come thorough those places with the
     intention of performing Hajj and 'Umra; and
     whoever is living within these boundaries can
     assume lhram from the place he starts, and the
     people of Mecca can assume Ihram from
     Mecca. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 600: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said,
     'The people of Medina should assume lhram
     from Dhul-Hulaifa; the people of Sham from
     Al-Juhfa; and the people of Najd from Qarn."
     And 'Abdullah added, "I was informed that
     Allah's Apostle had said, 'The people of Yemen
     should assume Ihram from Yalamlam.' " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 601: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas : 

     Allah's Apostle had fixed Dhul Hulaifa as the
     Mlqat for the people of Medina; Al-Juhfa for the
     people of Sham; and Qarn Ul-Manazil for the
     people of Najd; and Yalamlam for the people of
     Yemen. So, these (above mentioned) are the
     Mawaqit for all those living at those places, and
     besides them for those who come through those
     places with the intention of performing Hajj and
     'Umra and whoever lives within these places
     should assume Ihram from his dwelling place,
     and similarly the people of Mecca can assume
     lhram from Mecca. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 602: 

     Narrated Salim from his father who said,: 

     "The Prophet had fixed the Mawaqit as follows:
     (No. 603) 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 603: 

     Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah from his father: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The Miqat for
     the people of Medina is Dhul-Hulaifa; for the
     people of Sham is Mahita; (i.e. Al-Juhfa); and for
     the people of Najd is Qarn. And said Ibn 'Umar,
     "They claim, but I did not hear personally, that
     the Prophet said, "The Miqat for the people of
     Yemen is Yalamlam." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 604: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet fixed Dhul-Hulaifa as the Miqat for
     the people of Medina, Al-Juhfa, for the people of
     Sham, Yalamlam for the people of Yemen, and
     Qarn for the people of Najd. And these
     Mawaqlt are for those living at those very places,
     and besides them for those who come through
     those places with the intention of performing Hajj
     and Umra; and whoever is living inside these
     places can assume lhram from his own dwelling
     place, and the people of Mecca can assume
     lhram from Mecca. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 605: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) fixed Dhul-Hulaifa as the
     Miqat for the people of Medina, Al-Juhfa for the
     people of Sham, Qarn-ul-Manazil for the people
     of Najd, and Yalamlam for the people of Yemen;
     and these Mawaqit are for those living at those
     very places, and besides them for those whom
     come through them with the intention of
     performing Hajj and Umra; and whoever is living
     within these Mawaqit should assume lhram from
     where he starts, and the people of Mecca can
     assume Ihram from Mecca. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 606: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     When these two towns (Basra and Kufa) were
     captured, the people went to 'Umar and said, "O
     the Chief of the faithful believers! The Prophet
     fixed Qarn as the Miqat for the people of Najd,
     it is beyond our way and it is difficult for us to
     pass through it." He said, "Take as your Miqat a
     place situated opposite to Qarn on your usual
     way. So, he fixed Dhatu-Irq (as their Miqat)." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 607: 

     Narrated Nafi : 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar' said, "Allah's Apostle made
     his camel sit (i.e. he dismounted) at Al-Batha' in
     Dhul-Hulaifa and offered the prayer." 'Abdullah
     bin 'Umar used to do the same. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 608: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar : 

     Allah's Apostle used to go (for Hajj) via
     Ash-Shajara way and return via Muarras way;
     and no doubt, whenever Allah's Apostle went to
     Mecca, he used to offer the prayer in the
     Mosque of Ash-Shajara; and on his return, he
     used to offer the prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa in the
     middle of the valley, and pass the night there till
     morning. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 609: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     In the valley of Al-'Aqiq I heard Allah's Apostle
     saying, "To night a messenger came to me from
     my Lord and asked me to pray in this blessed
     valley and to assume Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra
     together. " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 610: 

     Narrated Musa bin 'Uqba: 

     Salim bin 'Abdullah's father said, "The Prophet
     said that while resting in the bottom of the valley
     at Mu'arras in Dhul-Hulaifa, he had been
     addressed in a dream: 'You are verily in a
     blessed valley.' " Salim made us to dismount from
     our camels at the place where 'Abdullah used to
     dismount, aiming at the place where Allah's
     Apostle had rested and it was below the Mosque
     situated in the middle of the valley in between
     them (the residence) and the road. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 611: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     Ibn 'Umar used to oil his hair. I told that to
     Ibrahim who said, "What do you think about this
     statement: Narrated Aswad from 'Aisha: As if I
     were now observing the glitter of the scent in the
     parting of the hair of the Prophet while he was
     Muhrim?" 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 612: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) I used to scent
     Allah's Apostle when he wanted to assume Ihram
     and also on finishing Ihram before the Tawaf
     round the Ka'ba (Tawaf-al-ifada). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 613: 

     Narrated Salim from his father: 

     I heard that Allah's Apostle assumed Ihram with
     his hair matted together. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 614: 

     Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah : 

     I heard my father saying, "Never did Allah's
     Apostle assume Ihram except at the Mosque,
     that is, at the Mosque of Dhul-Hulaifa. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 615: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     A man asked, "O Allah's Apostle! What kind of
     clothes should a Muhrim wear?" Allah's Apostle
     replied, "He should not wear a shirt, a turban,
     trousers, a headcloak or leather socks except if
     he can find no slippers, he then may wear leather
     socks after cutting off what might cover the
     ankles. And he should not wear clothes which
     are scented with saffron or Wars (kinds of
     Perfumes) . " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 616: 

     Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah: 

     Ibn Abbas' said, "Usama rode behind Allah's
     Apostle from 'Arafat to Al-Muzdalifa; and then
     Al-Fadl rode behind Allah's Apostle from
     Al-Muzdalifa to Mina." Ibn Abbas added, "Both
     of them said, 'The Prophet kept on reciting
     Talbiya till he did the Rami of Jamrat-al-'Aqaba.'
     " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 617: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas: 

     The Prophet with his companions started from
     Medina after combing and oiling his hair and
     putting on two sheets of lhram (upper body
     cover and waist cover). He did not forbid
     anyone to wear any kind of sheets except the
     ones colored with saffron because they may
     leave the scent on the skin. And so in the early
     morning, the Prophet mounted his Mount while in
     Dhul-Hulaifa and set out till they reached Baida',
     where he and his companions recited Talbiya,
     and then they did the ceremony of Taqlid (which
     means to put the colored garlands around the
     necks of the Budn (camels for sacrifice). And all
     that happened on the 25th of Dhul-Qa'da. And
     when he reached Mecca on the 4th of Dhul-Hijja
     he performed the Tawaf round the Ka'ba and
     performed the Tawaf between Safa and Marwa.
     And as he had a Badana and had garlanded it, he
     did not finish his Ihram. He proceeded towards
     the highest places of Mecca near Al-Hujun and
     he was assuming the Ihram for Hajj and did not
     go near the Ka'ba after he performed Tawaf
     (round it) till he returned from 'Arafat. Then he
     ordered his companions to perform the Tawaf
     round the Ka'ba and then the Tawaf of Safa and
     Marwa, and to cut short the hair of their heads
     and to finish their Ihram. And that was only for
     those people who had not garlanded Budn.
     Those who had their wives with them were
     permitted to contact them (have sexual
     intercourse), and similarly perfume and (ordinary)
     clothes were permissible for them. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 618: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet offered four Rakat in Medina and
     then two Rakat at DhulI lulaifa and then passed
     the night at Dhul-Hulaifa till it was morning and
     when he mounted his Mount and it stood up, he
     started to recite Talbiya. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 619: 

     Narrated Abu Qilaba: 

     Anas bin Malik said, "The Prophet offered four
     Rakat of the Zuhr prayer in Medina and two
     Rakat of 'Asr prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa." I think that
     the Prophet passed the night there till morning. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 620: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet offered four Rakat of the Zuhr
     prayer in Medina and two Rakat of the 'Asr
     prayer in Dhul-Hulaifa and I heard them (the
     companions of the Prophet) reciting Talbiya
     together loudly to the extent of shouting. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 621: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar : 

     The Talbiya of Allah's Apostle was : 'Labbaika
     Allahumma labbaik, Labbaika la sharika Laka
     labbaik, Inna-l-hamda wan-ni'mata Laka walmu
     Lk, La sharika Laka' (I respond to Your call O
     Allah, I respond to Your call, and I am obedient
     to Your orders, You have no partner, I respond
     to Your call All the praises and blessings are for
     You, All the sovereignty is for You, And You
     have no partners with you. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 622: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I know how the Prophet used to say (Talbiya)
     and it was: 'Labbaika Allahumma Labbaik,
     Labbaika la sharika Laka labbaik, Inna-l-hamda
     wan-ni'mata Laka walmu Lk, La sharika Laka'. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 623: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle offered four Rakat of Zuhr
     prayer at Medina and we were in his company,
     and two Rakat of the Asr prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa
     and then passed the night there till it was dawn;
     then he rode, and when he reached Al-Baida', he
     praised and glorified Allah and said Takbir (i.e.
     Alhamdu-lillah and Subhanallah(1) and
     Allahu-Akbar). Then he and the people along
     with him recited Talbiya with the intention of
     performing Hajj and Umra. When we reached
     (Mecca) he ordered us to finish the lhram (after
     performing the Umra) (only those who had no
     Hadi (animal for sacrifice) with them were asked
     to do so) till the day of Tarwiya that is 8th
     Dhul-Hijja when they assumed Ihram for Hajj.
     The Prophet sacrificed many camels (slaughtering
     them) with his own hands while standing. While
     Allah's Apostle was in Medina he sacrificed two
     horned rams black and white in color in the
     Name of Allah." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 624: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) recited Talbiya when he
     had mounted his Mount and was ready to set
     out. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 625: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Whenever Ibn 'Umar intended to go to Mecca
     he used to oil himself with a sort of oil that had
     no pleasant smell, then he would go to the
     Mosque of Al-Hulaita and offer the prayer, and
     then ride. When he mounted well on his Mount
     and the Mount stood up straight, he would
     proclaim the intention of assuming Ihram, and he
     used to say that he had seen the Prophet doing
     the same. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 626: 

     Narrated Mujahid: 

     I was in the company of Ibn Abbas and the
     people talked about Ad-Dajjal and said,
     "Ad-Dajjal will come with the word Kafir
     (non-believer) written in between his eyes." On
     that Ibn Abbas said, "I have not heard this from
     the Prophet but I heard him saying, 'As if I saw
     Moses just now entering the valley reciting
     Talbyia. ' " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 627: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) We set out
     with the Prophet in his last Hajj and we assumed
     Ihram for Umra. The Prophet then said,
     "Whoever has the Hadi with him should assume
     Ihram for Hajj along with 'Umra and should not
     finish the Ihram till he finishes both." I was
     menstruating when I reached Mecca, and so I
     neither did Tawaf round the Ka'ba nor Tawaf
     between Safa and Marwa. I complained about
     that to the Prophet on which he replied, "Undo
     and comb your head hair, and assume Ihram for
     Hajj (only) and leave the Umra." So, I did so.
     When we had performed the Hajj, the Prophet
     sent me with my brother 'Abdur-Rahman bin
     Abu Bakr to Tan'im. So I performed the 'Umra.
     The Prophet said to me, "This 'Umra is instead of
     your missed one." Those who had assumed
     Ihram for 'Umra (Hajj-atTamattu) performed
     Tawaf round the Ka'ba and between Safa and
     Marwa and then finished their Ihram. After
     returning from Mina, they performed another
     Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa). Those who
     had assumed Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra together
     (Hajj-al-Qiran) performed only one Tawaf
     (between Safa and Marwa). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 628: 

     Narrated Ata: 

     Jabir said, "The Prophet ordered Ali to keep on
     assuming his Ihram." The narrator then informed
     about the narration of Suraqa. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 629: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Ali came to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) from Yemen
     (to Mecca). The Prophet asked Ali, "With what
     intention have you assumed Ihram?" Ali replied,
     "I have assumed Ihram with the same intention as
     that of the Prophet." The Prophet said, "If I had
     not the Hadi with me I would have finished the
     Ihram." Muhammad bin Bakr narrated extra from
     Ibn Juraij, "The Prophet said to Ali, "With what
     intention have you assumed the Ihram, O Ali?"
     He replied, "With the same (intention) as that of
     the Prophet." The Prophet said, "Have a Hadi
     and keep your Ihram as it is." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 630: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet sent me to some people in Yemen
     and when I returned, I found him at Al-Batha.
     He asked me, "With what intention have you
     assumed Ihram (i.e. for Hajj or for Umra or for
     both?") I replied, "I have assumed Ihram with an
     intention like that of the Prophet." He asked,
     "Have you a Hadi with you?" I replied in the
     negative. He ordered me to perform Tawaf
     round the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa
     and then to finish my Ihram. I did so and went to
     a woman from my tribe who combed my hair or
     washed my head. Then, when Umar came (i.e.
     became Caliph) he said, "If we follow Allah's
     Book, it orders us to complete Hajj and Umra;
     as Allah says: "Perform the Hajj and Umra for
     Allah." (2.196). And if we follow the tradition of
     the Prophet who did not finish his Ihram till he
     sacrificed his Hadi." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 631: 

     Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad: 

     ' Aisha said, "We set out with Allah's Apostles in
     the months of Hajj, and (in) the nights of Hajj,
     and at the time and places of Hajj and in a state
     of Hajj. We dismounted at Sarif (a village six
     miles from Mecca). The Prophet then addressed
     his companions and said, "Anyone who has not
     got the Hadi and likes to do Umra instead of
     Hajj may do so (i.e. Hajj-al-Tamattu) and
     anyone who has got the Hadi should not finish
     the Ihram after performing ' Umra). (i.e.
     Hajj-al-Qiran). Aisha added, "The companions
     of the Prophet obeyed the above (order) and
     some of them (i.e. who did not have Hadi)
     finished their Ihram after Umra." Allah's Apostle
     and some of his companions were resourceful
     and had the Hadi with them, they could not
     perform Umra (alone) (but had to perform both
     Hajj and Umra with one Ihram). Aisha added,
     "Allah's Apostle came to me and saw me
     weeping and said, "What makes you weep, O
     Hantah?" I replied, "I have heard your
     conversation with your companions and I cannot
     perform the Umra." He asked, "What is wrong
     with you?' I replied, ' I do not offer the prayers
     (i.e. I have my menses).' He said, ' It will not
     harm you for you are one of the daughters of
     Adam, and Allah has written for you (this state)
     as He has written it for them. Keep on with your
     intentions for Hajj and Allah may reward you
     that." Aisha further added, "Then we proceeded
     for Hajj till we reached Mina and I became clean
     from my menses. Then I went out from Mina and
     performed Tawaf round the Ka'ba." Aisha
     added, "I went along with the Prophet in his final
     departure (from Hajj) till he dismounted at
     Al-Muhassab (a valley outside Mecca), and we
     too, dismounted with him." He called '
     Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr and said to him, '
     Take your sister outside the sanctuary of Mecca
     and let her assume Ihram for ' Umra, and when
     you had finished ' Umra, return to this place and I
     will wait for you both till you both return to me.' "
     ' Aisha added, ' ' So we went out of the
     sanctuary of Mecca and after finishing from the '
     Umra and the Tawaf we returned to the Prophet
     at dawn. He said, 'Have you performed the '
     Umra?' We replied in the affirmative. So he
     announced the departure amongst his
     companions and the people set out for the
     journey, and the Prophet: too left for Medina.'' 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 632: 

     Narrated Al-Aswad: 

     ' Aisha said, We went out with the Prophet (from
     Medina) with the intention of performing Hajj
     only and when we reached Mecca we performed
     Tawaf round the Kaba and then the Prophet
     ordered those who had not driven the Hadi along
     with them to finish their Ihram. So the people
     who had not driven the Hadi along with them
     finished their Ihram. The Prophet's wives, too,
     had not driven the Hadi with them, so they too,
     finished their Ihram." 'Aisha added, "I got my
     menses and could not perform Tawaf round the
     Ka'ba." So when it was the night of Hasba (i.e.
     when we stopped at Al-Muhassab), I said, 'O
     Allah's Apostle! Everyone is returning after
     performing Hajj and 'Umra but I am returning
     after performing Hajj only.' He said, 'Didn't you
     perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba the night we
     reached Mecca?' I replied in the negative. He
     said, 'Go with your brother to Tan'im and assume
     the Ihram for'Umra, (and after performing it)
     come back to such and such a place.' On that
     Safiya said, 'I feel that I will detain you all.' The
     Prophet said, 'O 'Aqra Halqa! Didn't you
     perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba on the day of
     sacrifice? (i.e. Tawaf-al-ifada) Safiya replied in
     the affirmative. He said, (to Safiya). 'There is no
     harm for you to proceed on with us.' " 'Aisha
     added, "(after returning from 'Umra), the Prophet
     met me while he was ascending (from Mecca)
     and I was descending to it, or I was ascending
     and he was descending." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 633: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We set out with Allah's Apostles (to Mecca) in
     the year of the Prophet's Last Hajj. Some of us
     had assumed Ihram for 'Umra only, some for
     both Hajj and 'Umra, and others for Hajj only.
     Allah's Apostle assumed Ihram for Hajj. So
     whoever had assumed Ihram for Hajj or for both
     Hajj and 'Umra did not finish the Ihram till the
     day of sacrifice. (See Hadith No. 631, 636, and
     639). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 634: 

     Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam: 

     I saw 'Uthman and 'Ali. 'Uthman used to forbid
     people to perform Hajj-at-Tamattu' and
     Hajj-al-Qiran (Hajj and 'Umra together), and
     when 'Ali saw (this act of 'Uthman), he assumed
     Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra together saying,
     "Lubbaik for 'Umra and Hajj," and said, "I will
     not leave the tradition of the Prophet on the
     saying of somebody." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 635: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The people (of the Pre-lslamic Period) used to
     think that to perform 'Umra during the months of
     Hajj was one of the major sins on earth. And
     also used to consider the month of Safar as a
     forbidden (i.e. sacred) month and they used to
     say, "When the wounds of the camel's back heal
     up (after they return from Hajj) and the signs of
     those wounds vanish and the month of Safar
     passes away then (at that time) 'Umra is
     permissible for the one who wishes to perform
     it." In the morning of the 4th of Dhul-Hijja, the
     Prophet and his companions reached Mecca,
     assuming Ihram for Hajj and he ordered his
     companions to make their intentions of the Ihram
     for'Umra only (instead of Hajj) so they
     considered his order as something great and
     were puzzled, and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     What kind (of finishing) of Ihram is allowed?"
     The Prophet replied, "Finish the Ihram
     completely like a non-Muhrim (you are allowed
     everything)." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 636: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     came to the Prophet (from Yemen and was
     assuming Ihram for Hajj) and he ordered me to
     finish the Ihram (after performing the 'Umra). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 637: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Hafsa the wife of the Prophet said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Why have the people finished their
     Ihram after performing 'Umra but you have not
     finished your Ihram after performing 'Umra?" He
     replied, "I have matted my hair and garlanded my
     Hadi. So I will not finish my Ihram till I have
     slaughtered (my Hadi). " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 638: 

     Narrated Shu'ba: 

     Abu Jamra Nasr bin 'Imran Ad-Duba'i said, "I
     intended to perform Hajj-at-Tamattu' and the
     people advised me not to do so. I asked Ibn
     Abbas regarding it and he ordered me to
     perform Hajj-at-Tammatu'. Later I saw in a
     dream someone saying to me, 'Hajj-Mabrur
     (Hajj performed in accordance with the
     Prophet's tradition without committing sins and
     accepted by Allah) and an accepted 'Umra.' So I
     told that dream to Ibn Abbas. He said, 'This is
     the tradition of Abu-l-Qasim.' Then he said to
     me, 'Stay with me and I shall give you a portion
     of my property.' " I (Shu'ba) asked, "Why (did
     he invite you)?" He (Abu Jamra) said, "Because
     of the dream which I had seen." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 639: 

     Narrated Abu Shihab: 

     I left for Mecca for Hajj-at-Tamattu' assuming
     Ihram for 'Umra. I reached Mecca three days
     before the day of Tarwiya (8th Dhul-Hijja).
     Some people of Mecca said to me, "Your Hajj
     will be like the Hajj performed by the people of
     Mecca (i.e. you will lose the superiority of
     assuming Ihram from the Miqat). So I went to
     'Ata' asking him his view about it. He said, "Jabir
     bin 'Abdullah narrated to me, 'I performed Hajj
     with Allah's Apostle on the day when he drove
     camels with him. The people had assumed Ihram
     for Hajj-al-Ifrad. The Prophet ordered them to
     finish their Ihram after Tawaf round the Ka'ba,
     and between Safa and Marwa and to cut short
     their hair and then to stay there (in Mecca) as
     non-Muhrims till the day of Tarwiya (i.e. 8th of
     Dhul-Hijja) when they would assume Ihram for
     Hajj and they were ordered to make the Ihram
     with which they had come as for 'Umra only.
     They asked, 'How can we make it 'Umra
     (Tamattu') as we have intended to perform Hajj?'
     The Prophet said, 'Do what I have ordered you.
     Had I not brought the Hadi with me, I would
     have done the same, but I cannot finish my Ihram
     till the Hadi reaches its destination (i.e. is
     slaughtered).' So, they did (what he ordered
     them to do)." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 640: 

     Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab: 

     'Ali and 'Uthman differed regarding
     Hajj-at-Tamattu' while they were at 'Usfan (a
     familiar place near Mecca). 'Ali said, "I see you
     want to forbid people to do a thing that the
     Prophet did?" When 'Ali saw that, he assumed
     Ihram for both Hajj and 'Umra. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 641: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah : 

     We came with Allah's Apostle (to Mecca) and
     we were saying: 'Labbaika Allahumma Labbaik'
     for Hajj. Allah's Apostle ordered us to perform
     'Umra with that Ihram (instead of Hajj). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 642: 

     Narrated 'Imran: 

     We performed Hajj-at-Tamattu' in the lifetime of
     Allah's Apostle and then the Quran was revealed
     (regarding Hajj-at-Tamattu') and somebody said
     what he wished (regarding Hajj-at-Tamattu')
     according his own opinion. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 643: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     On reaching the sanctuary of Mecca, Ibn 'Umar
     used to stop, reciting Talbiya and then he would
     pass the night at Dhi-Tuwa and then offer the
     Fajr prayer and take a bath. He used to say that
     the Prophet used to do the same. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 644: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     ' Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet passed the night
     at Dhi-Tuwa till it was dawn and then he entered
     Mecca." Ibn 'Umar used to do the same. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 645: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle used to enter Mecca from the
     high Thaniya and used to leave Mecca from the
     low Thaniya. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 646: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle entered Mecca from Kada' from
     the highest Thaniya which is at Al-Batha' and
     used to leave Mecca from the low Thaniya. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 647: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When the Prophet came to Mecca he entered
     from its higher side and left from its lower side. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 648: 

     Narrated 'Aisha': 

     In the year of the conquest of Mecca, the
     Prophet entered Mecca from Kada' and left
     Mecca from Kuda, from the higher part of
     Mecca. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 649: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     In the year of the conquest of Mecca, the
     Prophet entered Mecca from Kada' at the higher
     place of Mecca. (Hisham, a sub-narrator said, "
     'Urwa used to enter (Mecca) from both Kada'
     and Kuda and he often entered through Kada'
     which was nearer to his dwelling place.)" 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 650: 

     Narrated Hisham: 

     'Urwa said, "The Prophet entered Mecca in the
     year of the conquest of Mecca from the side of
     Kada' which is at the higher part of Mecca."
     'Urwa often entered from Kada' which was
     nearer of the two to his dwelling place. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 651: 

     Narrated Hisham from his father : 

     In the year of the conquest of Mecca, the
     Prophet entered Mecca from the side of Kada.
     Urwa used to enter through both places and he
     often entered through Kada' which was nearer of
     the two to his dwelling place. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 652: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     When the Ka'ba was built, the Prophet and
     Abbas went to bring stones (for its construction).
     Al Abbas said to the Prophet, "Take off your
     waist sheet and put it on your neck." (When the
     Prophet took it off) he fell on the ground with his
     eyes open towards the sky and said, "Give me
     my waist sheet." And he covered himself with it. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 653: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) that Allah's Apostle said
     to her, "Do you know that when your people
     (Quraish) rebuilt the Ka'ba, they decreased it
     from its original foundation laid by Abraham?" I
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why don't you rebuild
     it on its original foundation laid by Abraham?" He
     replied, "Were it not for the fact that your people
     are close to the pre-lslamic Period of ignorance
     (i.e. they have recently become Muslims) I would
     have done so." The sub-narrator, 'Abdullah (bin
     'Umar ) stated: 'Aisha 'must have heard this from
     Allah's Apostle for in my opinion Allah's Apostle
     had not placed his hand over the two corners of
     the Ka'ba opposite Al-Hijr only because the
     Ka'ba was not rebuilt on its original foundations
     laid by Abraham. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 654: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I asked the Prophet whether the round wall (near
     Ka'ba) was part of the Ka'ba. The Prophet
     replied in the affirmative. I further said, "What is
     wrong with them, why have they not included it in
     the building of the Ka'ba?" He said, "Don't you
     see that your people (Quraish) ran short of
     money (so they could not include it inside the
     building of Ka'ba)?" I asked, "What about its
     gate? Why is it so high?" He replied, "Your
     people did this so as to admit into it whomever
     they liked and prevent whomever they liked.
     Were your people not close to the Pre-lslamic
     Period of ignorance (i.e. they have recently
     embraced Islam) and were I not afraid that they
     would dislike it, surely I would have included the
     (area of the) wall inside the building of the Ka'ba
     and I would have lowered its gate to the level of
     the ground." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 655: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle said to me, "Were your people
     not close to the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance,
     I would have demolished the Ka'ba and would
     have rebuilt it on its original foundations laid by
     Abraham (for Quraish had curtailed its building),
     and I would have built a back door (too)." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 656: 

     Narrated Yazid bin Ruman from 'Urwa: 

     'Aisha said that the Prophet said to her, "O
     Aisha! Were your nation not close to the
     Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance, I would have
     had the Ka'ba demolished and would have
     included in it the portion which had been left, and
     would have made it at a level with the ground
     and would have made two doors for it, one
     towards the east and the other towards the west,
     and then by doing this it would have been built on
     the foundations laid by Abraham." That was what
     urged Ibn-Az-Zubair to demolish the Ka'ba. Jazz
     said, "I saw Ibn-Az-Zubair when he demolished
     and rebuilt the Ka'ba and included in it a portion
     of Al-Hijr (the unroofed portion of Ka'ba which
     is at present in the form of a compound towards
     the north-west of the Ka'ba). I saw the original
     foundations of Abraham which were of stones
     resembling the humps of camels." So Jarir asked
     Yazid, "Where was the place of those stones?"
     Jazz said, "I will just now show it to you." So
     Jarir accompanied Yazid and entered Al-Hijr,
     and Jazz pointed to a place and said, "Here it is."
     Jarir said, "It appeared to me about six cubits
     from Al-Hijr or so." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 657: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     On the Day of the Conquest of Mecca, Allah's
     Apostle said, "Allah has made this town a
     sanctuary. Its thorny bushes should not be cut, its
     game should not be chased, and its fallen things
     should not be picked up except by one who
     would announce it publicly." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 658: 

     Narrated 'Usama bin Zaid: 

     I asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Where will you stay
     in Mecca? Will you stay in your house in
     Mecca?" He replied, "Has 'Aqil left any property
     or house?" Aqil along with Talib had inherited the
     property of Abu Talib. Jafar and Ali did not
     inherit anything as they were Muslims and the
     other two were non-believers. 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab used to say, "A believer cannot
     inherit (anything from an) infidel." Ibn Shihab, (a
     sub-narrator) said, "They (Umar and others)
     derived the above verdict from Allah's Statement:
     "Verily! those who believed and Emigrated and
     strove with their life And property in Allah's
     Cause, And those who helped (the emigrants)
     And gave them their places to live in, These are
     (all) allies to one another." (8.72) 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 659: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     When Allah's Apostle intended to enter Mecca
     he said, "Our destination tomorrow, if Allah
     wished, will be Khaif Bani Kinana where (the
     pagans) had taken the oath of Kufr." (Against the
     Prophet i.e. to be loyal to heathenism by
     boycotting Bani Ha shim, the Prophets folk) (See
     Hadith No. 221 Vol. 5) 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 660: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     On the Day of Nahr at Mina, the Prophet said,
     "Tomorrow we shall stay at Khaif Bani Kinana
     where the pagans had taken the oath of Kufr
     (heathenism)." He meant (by that place)
     Al-Muhassab where the Quraish tribe and Bani
     Kinana concluded a contract against Bani
     Hashim and Bani 'Abdul-Muttalib or Bani
     Al-Muttalib that they would not intermarry with
     them or deal with them in business until they
     handed over the Prophet to them. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 661: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet;; said, "Dhus-Suwaiqa-tain (literally:
     One with two lean legs) from Ethiopia will
     demolish the Ka'ba." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 662: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The people used to fast on 'Ashura (the tenth day
     of the month of Muharram) before the fasting of
     Ramadan was made obligatory. And on that day
     the Ka'ba used to be covered with a cover.
     When Allah made the fasting of the month of
     Ramadan compulsory, Allah's Apostle said,
     "Whoever wishes to fast (on the day of 'Ashura')
     may do so; and whoever wishes to leave it can
     do so." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 663: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet said "The people will continue
     performing the Hajj and 'Umra to the Ka'ba even
     after the appearance of Gog and Magog." 

     Narrated Shu'ba extra: 

     The Hour (Day of Judgment) will not be
     established till the Hajj (to the Ka'ba) is
     abandoned. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 664: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     (One day) I sat along with Shaiba on the chair
     inside the Ka'ba. He (Shaiba) said, "No doubt,
     Umar sat at this place and said, 'I intended not to
     leave any yellow (i.e. gold) or white (i.e. silver)
     (inside the Ka'ba) undistributed.' I said (to
     'Umar), 'But your two companions (i.e. The
     Prophet and Abu Bakr) did not do so.' 'Umar
     said, They are the two persons whom I always
     follow.' " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 665: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "As if I were looking at him, a
     black person with thin legs plucking the stones of
     the Ka'ba one after another. " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 666: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "DhusSuwaiqatain (the thin
     legged man) from Ethiopia will demolish the
     Ka'ba." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 667: 

     Narrated 'Abis bin Rabia: 

     'Umar came near the Black Stone and kissed it
     and said "No doubt, I know that you are a stone
     and can neither benefit anyone nor harm anyone.
     Had I not seen Allah's Apostle kissing you I
     would not have kissed you." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 668: 

     Narrated Salim that his father said, 

     "Allah's Apostle, Usama bin Zaid, Bilal, and
     'Uthman bin abu Talha entered the Ka'ba and
     then closed its door. When they opened the door
     I was the first person to enter (the Ka'ba). I met
     Bilal and asked him, "Did Allah's Apostle offer a
     prayer inside (the Ka'ba)?" Bilal replied in the
     affirmative and said, "(The Prophet offered the
     prayer) in between the two right pillars." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 669: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Whenever Ibn 'Umar entered the Ka'ba he used
     to walk straight keeping the door at his back on
     entering, and used to proceed on till about three
     cubits from the wall in front of him, and then he
     would offer the prayer there aiming at the place
     where Allah's Apostle prayed, as Bilal had told
     him. There is no harm for any person to offer the
     prayer at any place inside the Ka'ba. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 670: 

     Narrated Isma'li bin Abu Khalid: 

     'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa said, "Allah's Apostle
     performed the 'Umra. He performed Tawaf of
     the Ka'ba and offered two Rakat behind the
     Maqam (Abraham's place) and was
     accompanied by those who were screening him
     from the people." Somebody asked 'Abdullah,
     "Did Allah's Apostle enter the Ka'ba?" 'Abdullah
     replied in the negative. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 671: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When Allah's Apostle came to Mecca, he
     refused to enter the Ka'ba with idols in it. He
     ordered (idols to be taken out). So they were
     taken out. The people took out the pictures of
     Abraham and Ishmael holding Azlams in their
     hands. Allah's Apostle said, "May Allah curse
     these people. By Allah, both Abraham and
     Ishmael never did the game of chance with
     Azlams." Then he entered the Ka'ba and said
     Takbir at its corners but did not offer the prayer
     in it. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 672: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When Allah's Apostle and his companions came
     to Mecca, the pagans circulated the news that a
     group of people were coming to them and they
     had been weakened by the Fever of Yathrib
     (Medina). So the Prophet ordered his
     companions to do Ramal in the first three rounds
     of Tawaf of the Ka'ba and to walk between the
     two corners (The Black Stone and Yemenite
     corner). The Prophet did not order them to do
     Ramal in all the rounds of Tawaf out of pity for
     them. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 673: 

     Narrated Salim that his father said: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle arriving at Mecca; he
     kissed the Black Stone Corner first while doing
     Tawaf and did ramal in the first three rounds of
     the seven rounds (of Tawaf). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 674: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar : 

     The Prophet did Ramal in (first) three rounds (of
     Tawaf), and walked in the remaining four, in Hajj
     and Umra. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 675: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Aslam from his father who
     said: 

     "Umar bin Al-Khattab addressed the Corner
     (Black Stone) saying, 'By Allah! I know that you
     are a stone and can neither benefit nor harm.
     Had I not seen the Prophet touching (and
     kissing) you, I would never have touched (and
     kissed) you.' Then he kissed it and said, 'There is
     no reason for us to do Ramal (in Tawaf) except
     that we wanted to show off before the pagans,
     and now Allah has destroyed them.' 'Umar
     added, '(Nevertheless), the Prophet did that and
     we do not want to leave it (i.e. Ramal).' 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 676: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Ibn 'Umar. said, "I have never missed the
     touching of these two stones of Ka'ba (the Black
     Stone and the Yemenite Corner) both in the
     presence and the absence of crowds, since I saw
     the Prophet touching them." I asked Nafi': "Did
     Ibn 'Umar use to walk between the two
     Corners?" Nafi' replied, "He used to walk in
     order that it might be easy for him to touch it (the
     Corner Stone)." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 677: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas.: 

     In his Last Hajj the Prophet performed Tawaf of
     the Ka'ba riding a camel and pointed a
     bent-headed stick towards the Corner (Black
     Stone). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 678: 

     Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah that his father said: 

     "I have not seen the Prophet touching except the
     two Yemenite Corners (i.e. the ones facing
     Yemen)." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 679: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Aslam that his father said: 

     "I saw 'Umar bin Al-Khattab kissing the Black
     Stone and he then said, (to it) 'Had I not seen
     Allah's Apostle kissing you, (stone) I would not
     have kissed you.' " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 680: 

     Narrated Az-Zubair bin 'Arabi: 

     A man asked Ibn 'Umar about the touching of
     the Black Stone. Ibn 'Umar said, "I saw Allah's
     Apostle touching and kissing it." The questioner
     said, "But if there were a throng (much rush)
     round the Ka'ba and the people overpowered
     me, (what would I do?)" He replied angrily,
     "Stay in Yemen (as that man was from Yemen). I
     saw Allah's Apostle touching and kissing it." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 681: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba
     while riding a camel, and whenever he came in
     front of the Corner, he pointed towards it (with
     something). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 682: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas 

     The Prophet performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba
     riding a camel, and every time he came in front of
     the Corner (having the Black Stone), he pointed
     towards it with something he had with him and
     said Takbir. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 683: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     'Aisha said, "The first thing the Prophet did on
     reaching Mecca, was the ablution and then he
     performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and that was not
     'Umra (alone), (but Hajj-al-Qiran). 'Urwa added:
     Later Abu Bakr and 'Umar did the same in their
     Hajj." And I performed the Hajj with my father
     Az-Zubair, and the first thing he did was Tawaf
     of the Ka'ba. Later I saw the Muhajirin
     (Emigrants) and the Ansar doing the same. My
     mother (Asma') told me that she, her sister
     ('Aisha), Az-Zubair and such and such persons
     assumed Ihram for 'Umra, and after they passed
     their hands over the Black Stone Corner (of the
     Ka'ba) they finished the Ihram. (i.e. After doing
     Tawaf of the Ka'ba and Sa'i between
     Safa-Marwa. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 684: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar : 

     When Allah's Apostle performed Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba for Hajj or 'Umra, he used to do Ramal
     during the first three rounds, and in the last four
     rounds he used to walk; then after the Tawaf he
     used to offer two Rakat and then performed
     Tawaf between Safa and Marwa. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 685: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     When the Prophet performed the Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba, he did Ramal during the first three rounds
     and in the last four rounds he used to walk and
     while doing Tawaf between Safa and Marwa, he
     used to run in the midst of the rain water
     passage. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 686: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) I informed Allah's
     Apostle that I was ill. So he said, "Perform the
     Tawaf while riding behind the people." I did so,
     and at that time the Prophet was praying beside
     the Ka'ba and reciting Surat-at-Tur. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 687: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     While the Prophet was performing Tawaf of the
     Kaba, he passed by a person who had tied his
     hands to another person with a rope or string or
     something like that. The Prophet cut it with his
     own hands and said, "Lead him by the hand." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 688: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet saw a man performing Tawaf of the
     Kaba tied with a string or something else. So the
     Prophet cut that string. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 689: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     In the year prior to the last Hajj of the Prophet
     when Allahs Apostle made Abu Bakr the leader
     of the pilgrims, the latter (Abu Bakr) sent me in
     the company of a group of people to make a
     public announcement: 'No pagan is allowed to
     perform Hajj after this year, and no naked
     person is allowed to perform Tawaf of the
     Kaba.' (See Hadith No. 365 Vol. 1) 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 690: 

     Narrated Amr: 

     We asked Ibn Umar: "May a man have sexual
     relations with his wife during the Umra before
     performing Tawaf between Safa and Marwa?"
     He said, "Allah's Apostle arrived (in Mecca) and
     circumambulated the Kaba seven times, then
     offered two Rakat behind Maqam Ibrahim (the
     station of Abraham), then performed Tawaf
     between Safa and Marwa." Ibn Umar added,
     "Verily! In Allah's Apostle you have a good
     example." And I asked Jabir bin Abdullah (the
     same question), and he replied, "You should not
     go near your wives (have sexual relations) till you
     have finished Tawaf between Safa and Marwa. " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 691: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet arrived at Mecca and performed
     Tawaf of the Kaba and Sa'i between Safa and
     Marwa, but he did not go near the Kaba after his
     Tawaf till he returned from Arafat. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 692: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) I informed Allah's
     Apostle (about my illness). (Through other
     sub-narrators, Um Salama narrated that when
     Allah's Apostle was at Mecca and had just
     decided to leave (Mecca) while she had not yet
     done Tawaf of the Kaba (and after listening to
     her). The Prophet said, "When the morning
     prayer is established, perform the Tawaf on your
     camel while the people are in prayer." So she did
     the same and did not offer the two Rakat of
     Tawaf until she came out of the Mosque. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 693: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     The Prophet reached Mecca, circumambulated
     the Kaba seven times and then offered a two
     Rakat prayer behind Maqam ibrahim. Then he
     went towards the Safa. Allah has said, "Verily, in
     Allah's Apostle you have a good example." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 694: 

     Narrated Urwa from Aisha: 

     Some people performed Tawaf (of the Kaba)
     after the morning prayer and then sat to listen to
     a preacher till sunrise, and then they stood up for
     the prayer. Then Aisha commented, "Those
     people kept on sitting till it was the time in which
     the prayer is disliked and after that they stood up
     for the prayer." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 695: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     heard the Prophet forbidding the offering of
     prayers at the time of sunrise and sunset. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 696: 

     Narrated Abida bin Humaid: 

     Abdul, Aziz bin Rufai Said, "I saw Abdullah bin
     Az-Zubair performing Tawaf of the Kaba after
     the morning prayer then offering the two Rakat
     prayer." Abdul Aziz added, "I saw Abdullah bin
     Az-Zubair offering a two Rakat prayer after the
     Asr prayer." He informed me that Aisha told him
     that the Prophet used to offer those two Rakat
     whenever he entered her house." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 697: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle performed Tawaf (of the Kaba)
     ending a camel (at that time the Prophet had foot
     injury). Whenever he came to the Corner (having
     the Black Stone) he would point out towards it
     with a thing in his hand and say, "Allahu-Akbar." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 698: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     I informed Allah's Apostle that I was sick. He
     said, "Perform Tawaf (of the Kaba) while riding
     behind the people." So, I performed the Tawaf
     while Allah's Apostle was offering the prayer
     beside the Kaba and was reciting Surat-at-Tur. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 699: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     Al Abbas bin Abdul-Muttalib asked the
     permission of Allahs Apostle to let him stay in
     Mecca during the nights of Mina in order to
     provide the pilgrims with water to drink, so the
     Prophet permitted him. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 700: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle came to the drinking place and
     asked for water. Al-Abbas said, "O Fadl! Go to
     your mother and bring water from her for Allah's
     Apostle ." Allah's Apostle said, "Give me water
     to drink." Al-Abbas said, "O Allahs Apostle!
     The people put their hands in it." Allah's Apostle
     again said, 'Give me water to drink. So, he drank
     from that water and then went to the Zam-zam
     (well) and there the people were offering water
     to the others and working at it (drawing water
     from the well). The Prophet then said to them,
     "Carry on! You are doing a good deed." Then he
     said, "Were I not afraid that other people would
     compete with you (in drawing water from
     Zam-zam), I would certainly take the rope and
     put it over this (i.e. his shoulder) (to draw
     water)." On saying that the Prophet pointed to
     his shoulder. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 701: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     I gave Zam-zam water to Allah's Apostle and he
     drank it while standing. 'Asia (a sub-narrator)
     said that 'Ikrima took the oath that on that day
     the Prophet had not been standing but riding a
     camel. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 702: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We set out with Allah's Apostle in the year of his
     Last Hajj and we mended (the Ihram) for 'Umra.
     Then the Prophet said, "Whoever has a Hadi
     with him should assume Ihram for both Hajj and
     'Umra, and should not finish it till he performs
     both of the them (Hajj and 'Umra)." When we
     reached Mecca, I had my menses. When we had
     performed our Hajj, the Prophet sent me with
     'Abdur-Rahman to Tan'im and I performed the
     'Umra. The Prophet said, "This is in lieu of your
     missed 'Umra." Those who had assumed Ihram
     for 'Umra performed Tawaf (between Safa and
     Marwa) and then finished their Ihram. And then
     they performed another Tawaf (between Safa
     and Marwa) after returning from Mina. And
     those who had assumed lhram for Hajj and
     'Umra to get her ( Hajj-Qiran ) performed only
     one Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 703: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     'Abdullah bin 'Abdullah bin 'Umar and his riding
     animal entered the house of Ibn 'Umar. He (the
     son of Ibn 'Umar) said, "I fear that this year a
     battle might take place between the people and
     you might be prevented from going to the Ka'ba.
     I suggest that you should stay here." Ibn Umar
     said, "Once Allah's Apostle set out for the
     pilgrimage, and the pagans of Quraish intervened
     between him and the Ka'ba. So, if the people
     intervened between me and the Ka'ba, I would
     do the same as Allah's Apostle had done . . .
     "Verily, in Allah's Apostle you have a good
     example." Then he added, "I make you a witness
     that I have intended to perform Hajj along with
     'Umra." After arriving at Mecca, Ibn 'Umar
     performed one Tawaf only (between Safa and
     Marwa). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 704: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Ibn 'Umar intended to perform Hajj in the year
     when Al-Hajjaj attacked Ibn Az-Zubair.
     Somebody said to Ibn 'Umar, "There is a danger
     of an impending war between them." Ibn 'Umar
     said, "Verily, in Allah's Apostle you have a good
     example. (And if it happened as you say) then I
     would do the same as Allah's Apostle had done.
     I make you witness that I have decided to
     perform 'Umra." Then he set out and when he
     reached Al-Baida', he said, "The ceremonies of
     both Hajj and 'Umra are similar. I make you
     witness that I have made Hajj compulsory for me
     along with 'Umra." He drove (to Mecca) a Hadi
     which he had bought from (a place called)
     Qudaid and did not do more than that. He did
     not slaughter the Hadi or finish his Ihram, or
     shave or cut short his hair till the day of
     slaughtering the sacrifices (10th Dhul-Hijja).
     Then he slaughtered his Hadi and shaved his
     head and considered the first Tawaf (of Safa and
     Marwa) as sufficient for Hajj and 'Umra. Ibn
     'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle did the same." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 705: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin 'AbdurRahman bin
     Nawfal Al-Qurashi: 

     I asked 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair (regarding the Hajj
     of the Prophet ). 'Urwa replied, "Aisha narrated,
     'When the Prophet reached Mecca, the first thing
     he started with was the ablution, then he
     performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and his intention
     was not 'Umra alone (but Hajj and 'Umra
     together).' " Later Abu Bakr I performed the
     Hajj and the first thing he started with was Tawaf
     of the Ka'ba and it was not 'Umra alone (but
     Hajj and 'Umra together). And then 'Umar did
     the same. Then 'Uthman performed the Hajj and
     the first thing he started with was Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba and it was not 'Umra alone. And then
     Muawiya and 'Abdullah bin 'Umar did the same.
     I performed Hajj with Ibn Az-Zubair and the first
     thing he started with was Tawaf of the Ka'ba and
     it was not 'Umra alone, (but Hajj and 'Umra
     together). Then I saw the Muhajirin (Emigrants)
     and Ansar doing the same and it was not 'Umra
     alone. And the last person I saw doing the same
     was Ibn 'Umar, and he did not do another 'Umra
     after finishing the first. Now here is Ibn 'Umar
     present amongst the people! They neither ask
     him nor anyone of the previous ones. And all
     these people, on entering Mecca, would not start
     with anything unless they had performed Tawaf
     of the Ka'ba, and would not finish their Ihram.
     And no doubt, I saw my mother and my aunt, on
     entering Mecca doing nothing before performing
     Tawaf of the Ka'ba, and they would not finish
     their lhram. And my mother informed me that
     she, her sister, Az-Zubair and such and such
     persons had assumed lhram for 'Umra and after
     passing their hands over the Corner (the Black
     Stone) (i.e. finishing their Umra) they finished
     their Ihram." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 706: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     I asked 'Aisha : "How do you interpret the
     statement of Allah,. : Verily! (the mountains)
     As-Safa and Al-Marwa are among the symbols
     of Allah, and whoever performs the Hajj to the
     Ka'ba or performs 'Umra, it is not harmful for
     him to perform Tawaf between them (Safa and
     Marwa.) (2.158). By Allah! (it is evident from
     this revelation) there is no harm if one does not
     perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa."
     'Aisha said, "O, my nephew! Your interpretation
     is not true. Had this interpretation of yours been
     correct, the statement of Allah should have been,
     'It is not harmful for him if he does not perform
     Tawaf between them.' But in fact, this divine
     inspiration was revealed concerning the Ansar
     who used to assume lhram for worship ping an
     idol called "Manat" which they used to worship
     at a place called Al-Mushallal before they
     embraced Islam, and whoever assumed Ihram
     (for the idol), would consider it not right to
     perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa. 

     When they embraced Islam, they asked Allah's
     Apostle (p.b.u.h) regarding it, saying, "O Allah's
     Apostle! We used to refrain from Tawaf
     between Safa and Marwa." So Allah revealed:
     'Verily; (the mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa
     are among the symbols of Allah.' " Aisha added,
     "Surely, Allah's Apostle set the tradition of Tawaf
     between Safa and Marwa, so nobody is allowed
     to omit the Tawaf between them." Later on I
     ('Urwa) told Abu Bakr bin 'Abdur-Rahman (of
     'Aisha's narration) and he said, 'i have not heard
     of such information, but I heard learned men
     saying that all the people, except those whom
     'Aisha mentioned and who used to assume lhram
     for the sake of Manat, used to perform Tawaf
     between Safa and Marwa. 

     When Allah referred to the Tawaf of the Ka'ba
     and did not mention Safa and Marwa in the
     Quran, the people asked, 'O Allah's Apostle!
     We used to perform Tawaf between Safa and
     Marwa and Allah has revealed (the verses
     concerning) Tawaf of the Ka'ba and has not
     mentioned Safa and Marwa. Is there any harm if
     we perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa?'
     So Allah revealed: "Verily As-Safa and
     Al-Marwa are among the symbols of Allah." Abu
     Bakr said, "It seems that this verse was revealed
     concerning the two groups, those who used to
     refrain from Tawaf between Safa and Marwa in
     the Pre-lslamic Period of ignorance and those
     who used to perform the Tawaf then, and after
     embracing Islam they refrained from the Tawaf
     between them as Allah had enjoined Tawaf of
     the Ka'ba and did not mention Tawaf (of Safa
     and Marwa) till later after mentioning the Tawaf
     of the Ka'ba.' 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 707: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Ibn 'Umar said, "When Allah's Apostle
     performed the first Tawaf he did Ramal in the
     first three rounds and then walked in the
     remaining four rounds (of Tawaf of the Ka'ba),
     where as in performing Tawaf between Safa and
     Marwa he used to run in the midst of the
     rain-water passage," I asked Nafi', "Did
     'Abdullah (bin 'Umar) use to walk steadily on
     reaching the Yemenite Corner?" He replied, "No,
     unless people were crowded at the Corner;
     otherwise he would not leave it without touching
     it." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 708: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Dinar: 

     We asked Ibn 'Umar whether a man who, while
     performing 'Umra, had performed Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba; and had not yet performed Tawaf
     between Safa and Marwa, could have sexual
     relation with his wife, Ibn 'Umar replied "The
     Prophet (p.b.u.h) reached Mecca and performed
     the seven rounds (of Tawaf) of the Ka'ba and
     then offered a two-Rakat prayer behind Maqam
     ibrahim and then performed the seven rounds (of
     Tawaf) between Safa and Marwa." He added,
     "Verily! In Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) you have a
     good example." We asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah
     (the same question) and he said, "He (that man)
     should not come near (his wife) till he has
     completed Tawaf between Safa and Marwa." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 709: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Dinar: 

     I heard Ibn 'Umar saying, "The Prophet arrived
     at Mecca and performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba
     and then offered a two-Rakat prayer and then
     performed Tawaf between Safa and Marwa."
     Ibn 'Umar then recited (the verse): "Verily! In
     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) you have a good
     example. " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 710: 

     Narrated 'Asim: 

     I asked Anas bin Malik: "Did you use to dislike
     to perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa?"
     He said, "Yes, as it was of the ceremonies of the
     days of the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance, till
     Allah revealed: 'Verily! (The two mountains)
     As-Safa and Al-Marwa are among the symbols
     of Allah. It is therefore no sin for him who
     performs the pilgrimage to the Ka'ba, or
     performs 'Umra, to perform Tawaf between
     them.' " (2.158) 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 711: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba
     and the Sa'i of Safa and Marwa so as to show
     his strength to the pagans. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 712: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I was menstruating when I reached Mecca. So, I
     neither performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba, nor the
     Tawaf between Safa and Marwa. Then I
     informed Allah's Apostle about it. He replied,
     "Perform all the ceremonies of Hajj like the other
     pilgrims, but do not perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba
     till you get clean (from your menses)." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 713: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet and his companions assumed Ihram
     for Hajj and none except the Prophet (p.b.u.h)
     and Talha had the Hadi (sacrifice) with them. 'Ali
     arrived from Yemen and had a Hadi with him.
     'Ali said, "I have assumed Ihram for what the
     Prophet has done." The Prophet ordered his
     companions to perform the 'Umra with the lhram
     which they had assumed, and after finishing
     Tawaf (of Ka'ba, Safa and Marwa) to cut short
     their hair, and to finish their lhram except those
     who had Hadi with them. They (the people) said,
     "How can we proceed to Mina (for Hajj) after
     having sexual relations with our wives?" When
     that news reached the Prophet he said, "If I had
     formerly known what I came to know lately, I
     would not have brought the Hadi with me. Had
     there been no Hadi with me, I would have
     finished the state of lhram." 'Aisha got her
     menses, so she performed all the ceremonies of
     Hajj except Tawaf of the Ka'ba, and when she
     got clean (from her menses), she performed
     Tawaf of the Ka'ba. She said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! (All of you) are returning with the Hajj
     and 'Umra, but I am returning after performing
     Hajj only." So the Prophet ordered
     'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr to accompany her
     to Tan'im and thus she performed the 'Umra after
     the Hajj. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 714: 

     Narrated Hafsa: 

     (On 'Id) We used to forbid our virgins to go out
     (for 'Id prayer). A lady came and stayed at the
     Palace of Bani Khalaf. She mentioned that her
     sister was married to one of the companions of
     Allah's Apostle who participated in twelve
     Ghazawats along with Allah's Apostle and her
     sister was with him in six of them. She said, "We
     used to dress the wounded and look after the
     patients." She (her sister) asked Allah's Apostle ,
     "Is there any harm for a woman to stay at home if
     she doesn't have a veil?" He said, "She should
     cover herself with the veil of her companion and
     she should take part in the good deeds and in the
     religious gatherings of the believers." When Um
     'Atiyya came, I asked her. "Did you hear
     anything about that?" Um 'Atiyya said, "Bi Abi"
     and she never mentioned the name of Allah's
     Apostle without saying "Bi Abi" (i.e. 'Let my
     father be sacrificed for you'). We asked her,
     "Have you heard Allah's Apostle saying so and
     so (about women)?" She replied in the affirmative
     and said, "Let my father be sacrificed for him. He
     told us that unmarried mature virgins who stay
     often screened or unmarried young virgins and
     mature girls who stay often screened should
     come out and take part in the good deeds and in
     the religious gatherings of the believers. But the
     menstruating women should keep away from the
     Musalla (praying place)." I asked her, "The
     menstruating women?" She replied, "Don't they
     present themselves at 'Arafat and at such and
     such places?" 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 715: 

     Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz bin Rufai: 

     I asked Anas bin Malik, "Tell me what you
     remember from Allah's Apostle (regarding these
     questions): Where did he offer the Zuhr and 'Asr
     prayers on the day of Tarwiya (8th day of
     Dhul-Hajja)?" He relied, "(He offered these
     prayers) at Mina." I asked, "Where did he offer
     the 'Asr prayer on the day of Nafr (i.e. departure
     from Mina on the 12th or 13th of Dhul-Hijja)?"
     He replied, "At Al-Abtah," and then added,
     "You should do as your chiefs do." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 716: 

     Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz: 

     I went out to Mina on the day of Tarwiya and
     met Anas going on a donkey. I asked him,
     "Where did the Prophet offer the Zuhr prayer on
     this day?" Anas replied, "See where your chiefs
     pray and pray similarly." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 717: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar : 

     Allah's Apostle offered a two-Rakat prayer at
     Mina. Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman, (during the
     early years of his caliphate) followed the same
     practice. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 718: 

     Narrated Haritha bin Wahab Al-Khuza'i: 

     The Prophet led us in a two-Rakat prayer at
     Mina although our number was more than ever
     and we were in better security than ever. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 719: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud: 

     I offered (only a) two Rakat prayer with the
     Prophet (at Mina), and similarly with Abu Bakr
     and with 'Umar, and then you d offered in
     opinions. Wish that I would be lucky enough to
     have two of the four Rakat accepted (by Allah). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 720: 

     Narrated Um Al-Fadl: 

     The people doubted whether the Prophet was
     observing the fast on the Day of 'Arafat, so I sent
     something for him to drink and he drank it. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 721: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Abu Bakr Al-Thaqafi: 

     I asked Anas bin Malik while we were
     proceeding from Mina to 'Arafat, "What do you
     use to do on this day when you were with Allah's
     Apostle ?" Anas said, "Some of us used to recite
     Talbiya and nobody objected to that, and others
     used to recite Takbir and nobody objected to
     that." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 722: 

     Narrated Salim: 

     'Abdul Malik wrote to Al-Hajjaj that he should
     not differ from Ibn 'Umar during Hajj. On the
     Day of 'Arafat, when the sun declined at midday,
     Ibn 'Umar came along with me and shouted near
     Al-Hajjaj's cotton (cloth) tent. Al-Hajjaj came
     Out, wrapping himself with a waist-sheet dyed
     with safflower, and said, "O Abu
     Abdur-Rahman! What is the matter?" He said, If
     you want to follow the Sunna (the tradition of the
     Prophet (p.b.u.h) ) then proceed (to 'Arafat)."
     Al-Hajjaj asked, "At this very hour?" Ibn 'Umar
     said, "Yes." He replied, "Please wait for me till I
     pour some water over my head (i.e. take a bath)
     and come out." Then Ibn 'Umar dismounted and
     waited till Al-Hajjaj came out. So, he (Al-Hajjaj)
     walked in between me and my father (Ibn
     'Umar). I said to him, "If you want to follow the
     Sunna then deliver a brief sermon and hurry up
     for the stay at 'Arafat." He started looking at
     'Abdullah (Ibn 'Umar) (inquiringly), and when
     'Abdullah noticed that, he said that he had told
     the truth. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 723: 

     Narrated Um Al-Fadl bint Al Harith: 

     On the day of 'Arafat, some people who were
     with me, differed about the fasting of the Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) some said that he was fasting while
     others said that he was not fasting. So I sent a
     bowl full of milk to him while he was riding his
     camel, and he drank that milk. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 724: 

     Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     'Abdul-Malik bin Marwan wrote to Al-Hajjaj
     that he should follow 'Abdullah bin 'Umar in all
     the ceremonies of Hajj. So when it was the Day
     of 'Arafat (9th of Dhul-Hajja), and after the sun
     has deviated or has declined from the middle of
     the sky, I and Ibn 'Umar came and he shouted
     near the cotton (cloth) tent of Al-Hajjaj, "Where
     is he?" Al-Hajjaj came out. Ibn 'Umar said, "Let
     us proceed (to 'Arafat)." Al-Hajjaj asked, "Just
     now?" Ibn 'Umar replied, "Yes." Al-Hajjaj said,
     "Wait for me till I pour water on me (i.e. take a
     bath)." So, Ibn 'Umar dismounted (and waited)
     till Al-Hajjaj came out. He was walking between
     me and my father. I informed Al-Hajjaj, "If you
     want to follow the Sunna today, then you should
     shorten the sermon and then hurry up for the stay
     (at 'Arafat)." Ibn 'Umar said, "He (Salim) has
     spoken the truth." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 725: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Jubair bin Mut'im: 

     My father said, "(Before Islam) I was looking for
     my camel .." The same narration is told by a
     different sub-narrator. Jubair bin Mut'im said,
     "My camel was lost and I went out in search of it
     on the day of 'Arafat, and I saw the Prophet
     standing in 'Arafat. I said to myself: By Allah he
     is from the Hums (literally: strictly religious,
     Quraish were called so, as they used to say, 'We
     are the people of Allah we shall not go out of the
     sanctuary). What has brought him here?" 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 726: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     During the pre-lslamic period of Ignorance, the
     people used to perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba
     naked except the Hums; and the Hums were
     Quraish and their offspring. The Hums used to
     give clothes to the men who would perform the
     Tawaf wearing them; and women (of the Hums)
     used to give clothes to the women who would
     perform the Tawaf wearing them. Those to
     whom the Hums did not give clothes would
     perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba naked. Most of
     the people used to go away (disperse) directly
     from 'Arafat but they (Hums) used to depart after
     staying at Al-Muzdalifa. 'Urwa added, "My
     father narrated that 'Aisha had said, 'The
     following verses were revealed about the Hums:
     Then depart from the place whence all the
     people depart--(2.199) 'Urwa added, "They (the
     Hums) used to stay at Al-Muzdalifa and used to
     depart from there (to Mina) and so they were
     sent to 'Arafat (by Allah's order)." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 727: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     Usama was asked in my presence, "How was
     the speed of (the camel of) Allah's Apostle while
     departing from 'Arafat during the Hajjatul
     Wada?" Usama replied, "The Prophet
     proceeded on with a modest pace, and when
     there was enough space he would (make his
     camel) go very fast." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 728: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     As soon as the Prophet departed from 'Arafat,
     he went towards the mountain pass, and there he
     answered the call of) the prayer is ahead of you
     (i.e. at asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Will you offer
     the prayer here?" He replied, "(The place of) the
     prayer is ahead of you (i.e. at Al-Muzdalifa)." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 729: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to offer the Maghrib
     and 'Isha' prayers together at Jam'
     (Al-Muzdalifa). But he used to pass by that
     mountain pass where Allah's Apostle went, and
     he would enter it and answer the call of nature
     and perform ablution, and would not offer any
     prayer till he had prayed at Jam.' 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 730: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid 

     rode behind Allah's Apostle from 'Arafat and
     when Allah's Apostle reached the mountain pass
     on the left side which is before Al-Muzdalifa he
     made his camel kneel and then urinated, and then
     I poured water for his ablution. He performed
     light ablution and then I said to him: (Is it the time
     for) the prayer, O Allah's Apostle!" He replied,
     "The (place of) prayer is ahead of you (i.e. at
     Al-Muzdalifa)." So Allah's Apostle rode till he
     reached Al-Muzdalifa and then he offered the
     prayer (there) . Then in the morning (10th
     Dhul-Hijja) Al-Faql (bin Abbas) rode behind
     Allah's Apostle. Kuraib, (a sub-narrator) said
     that 'Abdullah bin Abbas narrated from Al-Fadl,
     "Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) kept on reciting
     Talbiya (during the journey) till he reached the
     Jamra." (Jamrat-al-Aqaba) 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 731: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas. : 

     I proceeded along with the Prophet on the day of
     'Arafat (9th Dhul-Hijja). The Prophet heard a
     great hue and cry and the beating of camels
     behind him. So he beckoned to the people with
     his lash, "O people! Be quiet. Hastening is not a
     sign of righteousness." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 732: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     Allah's Apostle proceeded from 'Arafat and
     dismounted at the mountainous pass and then
     urinated and performed a light ablution. I said to
     him, "(Shall we offer) the prayer?" He replied,
     "The prayer is ahead of you (i.e. at
     Al-Muzdalifa)." When he came to Al-Muzdalifa,
     he performed a perfect ablution. Then Iqama for
     the prayer was pronounced and he offended the
     Maghrib prayer and then every person made his
     camel kneel at his place; and then Iqama for the
     prayer was pronounced and he offered the
     ('Isha') prayer and he did not offer any prayer in
     between them (i.e. Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 733: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet offered the Maghrib and 'Isha'
     prayers together at Jam' (i.e. Al-Muzdalifa) with
     a separate Iqama for each of them and did not
     offer any optional prayer in between them or
     after each of them. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 734: 

     Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari : 

     Allah's Apostle coffered the Maghrib and 'Isha'
     prayers together at Al-Muzdalifa. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 735: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid: 

     'Abdullah;- performed the Hajj and we reached
     Al-Muzdalifa at or about the time of the 'Isha'
     prayer. He ordered a man to pronounce the
     Adhan and Iqama and then he offered the
     Maghrib prayer and offered two Rakat after it.
     Then he asked for his supper and took it, and
     then, I think, he ordered a man to pronounce the
     Adhan and Iqama (for the 'isha' prayer). ('Amr, a
     sub-narrator said: The intervening statement 'I
     think', was said by the sub-narrator Zuhair) (i.e.
     not by 'Abdu-Rahman). Then 'Abdullah offered
     two Rakat of 'Isha' prayer. When the day
     dawned, 'Abdullah said, "The Prophet never
     offered any prayer at this hour except this prayer
     at this time and at this place and on this day."
     'Abdullah added, "These two prayers are shifted
     from their actual times -- the Maghrib prayer (is
     offered) when the people reached Al-Muzdalifa
     and the Fajr (morning) prayer at the early dawn."
     'Abdullah added, "I saw the Prophet doing that." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 736: 

     Narrated Salim: 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to send the weak
     among his family early to Mina. So they used to
     depart from Al-Mash'ar Al-Haram (that is
     Al-Muzdalifa) at night (when the moon had set)
     and invoke Allah as much as they could, and then
     they would return (to Mina) before the Imam had
     started from Al-Muzdalifa to Mina. So some of
     them would reach Mina at the time of the Fajr
     prayer and some of them would come later.
     When they reached Mina they would throw
     pebbles on the Jamra (Jamrat-al-Aqaba) Ibn
     'Umar used to say, "Allah's Apostle gave the
     permission to them (weak people) to do so." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 737: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas : 

     Allah's Apostle had sent me from Jam' (i.e.
     Al-Muzdalifa) at night. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 738: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     I as among those whom the Prophet sent on the
     night of Al-Muzdalifa early being among the
     weak members of his family. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 739: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     (the slave of Asma') During the night of Jam',
     Asma' got down at Al-Muzdalifa and stood up
     for (offering) the prayer and offered the prayer
     for some time and then asked, "O my son! Has
     the moon set?" I replied in the negative and she
     again prayed for another period and then asked,
     "Has the moon set?" I replied, "Yes." So she said
     that we should set out (for Mina), and we
     departed and went on till she threw pebbles at
     the Jamra (Jamrat-al-Aqaba) and then she
     returned to her dwelling place and offered the
     morning prayer. I asked her, "O you! I think we
     have come (to Mina) early in the night." She
     replied, "O my son! Allah's Apostle gave
     permission to the women to do so." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 740: 

     Narrated 'Aisha : 

     Sauda asked the permission of the Prophet to
     leave earlier at the night of Jam', and she was a
     fat and very slow woman. The Prophet gave her
     permission. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 741: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We got down at Al-Muzdalifa and Sauda asked
     the permission of the Prophet to leave (early)
     before the rush of the people. She was a slow
     woman and he gave her permission, so she
     departed (from Al-Muzdalifa) before the rush of
     the people. We kept on staying at Al-Muzdalifa
     till dawn, and set out with the Prophet but (I
     suffered so much that) I wished I had taken the
     permission of Allah's Apostle as Sauda had
     done, and that would have been dearer to me
     than any other happiness. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 742: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     I never saw the Prophet offering any prayer not
     at its stated time except two; he prayed the
     Maghrib and the 'Isha' together and he offered
     the morning prayer before its usual time. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 743: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid 

     I went out with 'Abdullah , to Mecca and when
     we proceeded to am' he offered the two prayers
     (the Maghrib and the 'Isha') together, making the
     Adhan and Iqama separately for each prayer. He
     took his supper in between the two prayers. He
     offered the Fajr prayer as soon as the day
     dawned. Some people said, "The day had
     dawned (at the time of the prayer)," and others
     said, "The day had not dawned." 'Abdullah then
     said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'These two prayers
     have been shifted from their stated times at this
     place only (at Al-Muzdalifa); first: The Maghrib
     and the 'Isha'. So the people should not arrive at
     Al-Muzdalifa till the time of the 'Isha' prayer has
     become due. The second prayer is the morning
     prayer which is offered at this hour.' " Then
     'Abdullah stayed there till it became a bit
     brighter. He then said, "If the chief of the
     believers hastened onwards to Mina just now,
     then he had indeed followed the Sunna." I do not
     know which proceeded the other, his
     ('Abdullah's) statement or the departure of
     'Uthman . Abdullah was reciting Talbiya till he
     threw pebbles at the Jamrat-al-'Aqaba on the
     Day of Nahr (slaughtering) (that is the 10th of
     Dhul-Hijja). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 744: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun: 

     I saw 'Umar, offering the Fajr (morning) prayer
     at Jam'; then he got up and said, "The pagans did
     not use to depart (from Jam') till the sun had
     risen, and they used to say, 'Let the sun shine on
     Thabir (a mountain).' But the Prophet
     contradicted them and departed from Jam'
     before sunrise." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 745: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet made Al-Faql ride behind him, and
     Al-Fadl informed that he (the Prophet ) kept on
     reciting Talbiya till he did the Rami of the Jamra.
     (Jamrat-al-Aqaba.) 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 746: 

     Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah: 

     Ibn Abbas said, "Usama bin Zaid rode behind
     the Prophet from 'Arafat to Al-Muzdalifa; and
     then from Al-Muzdalifa to Mina, Al-Fadl rode
     behind him." He added, "Both of them (Usama
     and Al-Fadl) said, 'The Prophet was constantly
     reciting Talbiya till he did Rami of the
     Jamarat-al-'Aqaba." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 747: 

     Narrated Abu Jamra: 

     I asked Ibn Abbas about Hajj-at-Tamattu'. He
     ordered me to perform it. I asked him about the
     Hadi (sacrifice). He said, "You have to slaughter
     a camel, a cow or a sheep, or you may share the
     Hadi with the others." It seemed that some
     people disliked it (Hajj-at-Tamattu). I slept and
     dreamt as if a person was announcing: "Hajj
     Mabrur and accepted Mut'ah
     (Hajj-At-Tamattu')" I went to Ibn Abbas and
     narrated it to him. He said, "Allah is Greater.
     (That was) the tradition of Abu Al-Qasim (i.e.
     Prophet). Narrated Shu'ba that the call in the
     dream was. "An accepted 'Umra and
     Hajj-Mabrur. " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 748: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira' : 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) saw a man driving his
     Badana (sacrificial camel). He said, "Ride on it."
     The man said, "It is a Badana." The Prophet said,
     "Ride on it." He (the man) said, "It is a Badana."
     The Prophet said, "Ride on it." And on the
     second or the third time he (the Prophet ) added,
     "Woe to you." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 749: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet saw a man driving a Badana. He
     said, "Ride on it." The man replied, "It is a
     Badana." The Prophet said (again), "Ride on it."
     He (the man) said, "It is a Badana." The Prophet
     said thrice, "Ride on it." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 750: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     During the last Hajj (Hajj-al-Wada') of Allah's
     Apostle he performed 'Umra and Hajj. He drove
     a Hadi along with him from Dhul-Hulaifa. Allah's
     Apostle started by assuming Ihram for'Umra and
     Hajj. And the people, too, performed the 'Umra
     and Hajj along with the Prophet. Some of them
     brought the Hadi and drove it along with them,
     while the others did not. So, when the Prophet
     arrived at Mecca. he said to the people,
     "Whoever among you has driven the Hadi,
     should not finish his Ihram till he completes his
     Hajj. And whoever among you has not (driven)
     the Hadi with him, should perform Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba and the Tawaf between Safa and Marwa,
     then cut short his hair and finish his Ihram, and
     should later assume Ihram for Hajj; but he must
     offer a Hadi (sacrifice); and if anyone cannot
     afford a Hadi, he should fast for three days
     during the Hajj and seven days when he returns
     home. The Prophet performed Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba on his arrival (at Mecca); he touched the
     (Black Stone) corner first of all and then did
     Ramal (fast walking with moving of the
     shoulders) during the first three rounds round the
     Ka'ba, and during the last four rounds he
     walked. After finishing Tawaf of the Ka'ba, he
     offered a two Rakat prayer at Maqam Ibrahim,
     and after finishing the prayer he went to Safa and
     Marwa and performed seven rounds of Tawaf
     between them and did not do any deed
     forbidden because of Ihram, till he finished all the
     ceremonies of his Hajj and sacrificed his Hadi on
     the day of Nahr (10th day of Dhul-Hijja). He
     then hastened onwards (to Mecca) and
     performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and then
     everything that was forbidden because of Ihram
     became permissible. Those who took and drove
     the Hadi with them did the same as Allah's
     Apostle did. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 751: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     'Abdullah (bin 'Abdullah) bin 'Umar said to his
     father, "Stay here, for I am afraid that it (affliction
     between Ibn Zubair and Al-Hajjaj) might prevent
     you from reaching the Ka'ba." Ibn 'Umar said,
     "(In this case) I would do the same as Allah's
     Apostle did, and Allah has said, 'Verily, in Allah's
     Apostle, you have a good example (to follow).'
     So, I make you, people, witness that I have
     made 'Umra compulsory for me." So he assumed
     lhram for'Umra. Then he went out and when he
     reached Al-Baida', he assumed Ihram for Hajj
     and 'Umra (together) and said, "The conditions
     (requisites) of Hajj and 'Umra are the same." He,
     then brought a Hadi from Qudaid. Then he
     arrived (at Mecca) and performed Tawaf
     (between Safa and Marwa) once for both Hajj
     and 'Umra and did not finish the lhram till he had
     finished both Hajj and 'Umra. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 752: 

     Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and
     Marwan: 

     The Prophet set out from Medina with over one
     thousand of his companions (at the time of the
     Treaty of Hudaibiya) and when they reached
     Dhul-Hulaifa, the Prophet garlanded his Hadi and
     marked it and assumed Ihram for'Umra. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 753: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I twisted with my own hands the garlands for the
     Budn of the Prophet who garlanded and marked
     them, and then made them proceed to Mecca;
     Yet no permissible thing was regarded as illegal
     for him then. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 754: 

     Narrated Hafsa: 

     I said, "O Allah's Apostle! What is wrong with
     the people, they have finished their Ihram but you
     have not?" He said, "I matted my hair and I have
     garlanded my Hadi, so I will not finish my Ihram
     till I finished my Hajj ." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 755: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to send the Hadi from
     Medina and I used to twist the garlands for his
     Hadi and he did not keep away from any of
     these things which a Muhrim keeps away from. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 756: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I twisted the garlands for the Hadis of the
     Prophet and then he marked and garlanded them
     (or I garlanded them) and then made them
     proceed to the Ka'ba but he remained in Medina
     and no permissible thing was regarded as illegal
     for him then . 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 757: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Bakr bin 'Amr bin
     Hazm 

     that 'Amra bint 'Abdur-Rahman had told him,
     "Zaid bin Abu Sufyan wrote to 'Aisha that
     'Abdullah bin Abbas had stated, 'Whoever sends
     his Hadi (to the Ka'ba), all the things which are
     illegal for a (pilgrim) become illegal for that
     person till he slaughters it (i.e. till the 10th of
     Dhul-Hijja).' " 'Amra added, 'Aisha said, 'It is not
     like what Ibn Abbas had said: I twisted the
     garlands of the Hadis of Allah's Apostle with my
     own hands. Then Allah's Apostle put them round
     their necks with his own hands, sending them
     with my father; Yet nothing permitted by Allah
     was considered illegal for Allah's Apostle till he
     slaughtered the Hadis.' " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 758: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Once the Prophet sent sheep as Hadi. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 759: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I used to make the garlands for (the Hadis of) the
     Prophet and he would garland the sheep (with
     them) and would stay with his family as a
     non-Muhrim. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 760: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     I used to twist the garlands for the sheep of the
     Prophet and he would send them (to the Ka'ba),
     and stay as a non-Muhrim. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 761: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I twisted (the garlands) for the Hadis of the
     Prophet before he assumed Ihram. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 762: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I twisted the garlands of the Hadis from the wool
     which was with me. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 763: 

     Narrated 'Ikrima: 

     Abu Huraira said, "The Prophet saw a man
     driving a Badana (sacrificial camel). The Prophet
     (p.b.u.h) said (to him), 'Ride on it.' He replied, 'It
     is a Badana.' The Prophet again said, 'Ride on it!'
     Abu Huraira added, 'Then I saw that man riding
     it, showing obedience to the Prophet (p.b.u.h),
     and a shoe was (hanging) from its neck.' " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 764: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     From the Prophet: (as above). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 765: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     Allah's Apostle ordered me to give in charity the
     skin and the coverings of the Budn which I had
     slaughtered. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 766: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Ibn 'Umar intended to perform Hajj in the year of
     the Hajj of Al-Harawriya during the rule of Ibn
     Az-Zubair. Some people said to him, "It is very
     likely that there will be a fight among the people,
     and we are afraid that they might prevent you
     (from performing Hajj)." He replied, "Verily, in
     Allah's Apostle there is a good example for you
     (to follow). In this case I would do the same as
     he had done. I make you witness that I have
     intended to perform 'Umra." When he reached
     Al-Baida', he said, "The conditions for both Hajj
     and 'Umra are the same. I make you witness that
     I have intended to perform Hajj along with
     'Umra." After that he took a garlanded Hadi (to
     Mecca) which he bought (on the way). When he
     reached (Mecca), he performed Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba and of Safa (and Marwa) and did not do
     more than that. He did not make legal for himself
     the things which were illegal for a Muhrim till it
     was the Day of Nahr (sacrifice), when he had his
     head shaved and slaughtered (the sacrifice) and
     considered sufficient his first Tawaf (between
     Safa and Marwa), as a (Sa'i) for his Hajj and
     'Umra both. He then said, "The Prophet used to
     do like that." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 767: 

     Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman: 

     I heard 'Aisha saying, "Five days before the end
     of Dhul-Qa'ada we set out from Medina in the
     company of Allah's Apostle with the intention of
     performing Hajj only. When we approached
     Mecca, Allah's Apostle ordered those who had
     no Hadi with them to finish their lhram after
     performing Tawaf of the Ka'ba and (Sa'i) and
     between Safa and Marwa." 'Aisha added, "On
     the day of Nahr (slaughtering of sacrifice) beef
     was brought to us. I asked, 'What is this?' The
     reply was, 'Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) has
     slaughtered (sacrifices) on behalf of his wives.' " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 768: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     'Abdullah (bin 'Umar), used to slaughter (his
     sacrifice) at the Manhar. ('Ubaidullah, a
     sub-narrator said, "The Manhar of Allah's
     Apostle.") 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 769: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Ibn 'Umar used to send his Hadi from Jam' (to
     Mina) in the last third of the night with the
     pilgrims amongst whom there were free men and
     slaves, till it was taken into the Manhar
     (slaughtering place) of the Prophet . 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 770: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Bakkar: 

     The narration of Anas abridged, saying, "The
     Prophet slaughtered seven Budn (camels) while
     standing, with his own hands. On the day of
     'Id-ul-Adha he slaughtered (sacrificed) two
     horned rams, black and white in color. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 771: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Jubair: 

     I saw Ibn 'Umar passing by a man who had
     made his Badana sit to slaughter it. Ibn 'Umar
     said, "Slaughter it while it is standing with one leg
     tied up as is the tradition of Muhammad." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 772: 

     Narrated Anas : 

     The Prophet offered four Rakat of Zuhr prayer at
     Medina; and two Rakat of 'Asr prayer at
     Dhul-hulaifa and spent the night there and when
     (the day) dawned, he mounted his Mount and
     started saying, "None has the right to be
     worshipped but Allah, and Glorified be Allah."
     When he reached Al-Baida' he recited Talbiya
     for both Hajj and 'Umra. And when he arrived at
     Mecca, he ordered them (his companions) to
     finish their Ihram. The Prophet slaughtered seven
     Budn (camel) with his own hands while the
     camels were standing He also sacrificed two
     horned rams (black and white in color) at
     Medina. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 773: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet (p.b.u.h) offered four Rakat of Zuhr
     prayer at Medina and two Rakat of 'Asr prayer
     at Dhul-Hulaifa. Narrated Aiyub: "A man said:
     Anas said, "Then he (the Prophet passed the
     night there till dawn and then he offered the
     morning (Fajr) prayer, and mounted his Mount
     and when it arrived at Al-Baida' he assumed
     Ihram for both 'Umra and Hajj." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 774: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     The Prophet sent me to supervise the
     (slaughtering of) Budn (Hadi camels) and
     ordered me to distribute their meat, and then he
     ordered me to distribute their covering sheets
     and skins. 'All added, "The Prophet ordered me
     to supervise the slaughtering (of the Budn) and
     not to give anything (of their bodies) to the
     butcher as wages for slaughtering." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 775: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     The Prophet ordered me to supervise the
     (slaughtering) of Budn (Hadi camel) and to
     distribute their meat, skins and covering sheets in
     charity and not to give anything (of their bodies)
     to the butcher as wages for slaughtering. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 776: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     The Prophet offered one hundred Budn as Hadi
     and ordered me to distribute their meat (in
     charity) and I did so. Then he ordered me to
     distribute their covering sheets in charity and I
     did so. Then he ordered me to distribute their
     skins in charity and I did so. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 777: 

     Narrated Ibn Juraij: 

     'Ata' said, "I heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying,
     'We never ate the meat of the Budn for more
     than three days of Mina. Later, the Prophet gave
     us permission by saying: 'Eat and take (meat)
     with you. So we ate (some) and took (some)
     with us.' " I asked 'Ata', "Did Jabir say (that they
     went on eating the meat) till they reached
     Medina?" 'Ata' replied, "No." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 778: 

     Narrated 'Amra: 

     I heard 'Aisha saying, "We set out (from Medina)
     along with Allah's Apostle five days before the
     end of Dhul-Qa'da with the intention of
     performing Hajj only. When we approached
     Mecca, Allah's Apostle ordered those who had
     no Hadi along with them to finish the lhram after
     performing Tawaf of the Ka'ba, (Safa and
     Marwa). 'Aisha added, "Beef was brought to us
     on the Day of Nahr and I said, 'What is this?'
     Somebody said, 'The Prophet has slaughtered
     (cows) on behalf of his wives.' " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 779: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet was asked about a person who had
     his head shaved before slaughtering (his Hadi)
     (or other similar ceremonies of Hajj). He replied,
     "There is no harm, there is no harm." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 780: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     A man said to the Prophet "I performed the
     Tawaf-al-Ifada before the Rami (throwing
     pebbles at the Jamra)." The Prophet replied,
     "There is no harm." The man said, "I had my
     head shaved before slaughtering." The Prophet
     replied, "There is no harm." He said, "I have
     slaughtered the Hadi before the Rami." The
     Prophet replied, "There is no harm." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 781: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet was asked by a man who said, "I
     have done the Rami in the evening." The Prophet
     replied, "There is no harm in it." Another man
     asked, "I had my head shaved before the
     slaughtering." The Prophet replied, "There is no
     harm in it." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 782: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     came upon Allah's Apostle when he was at
     Al-Bat-ha. He asked me, "Have you intended to
     perform the Hajj?" I replied in the affirmative. He
     asked, "For what have you assumed lhram?" I
     replied," I have assumed Ihram with the same
     intention as that of the Prophet ." The Prophet
     said, "You have done well! Go and perform
     Tawaf round the Ka'ba and between Safa and
     Marwa." Then I went to one of the women of
     Bani Qais and she took out lice from my head.
     Later, I assumed the Ihram for Hajj. So, I used
     to give this verdict to the people till the caliphate
     of 'Umar. When I told him about it, he said, "If
     we take (follow) the Holy Book, then it orders us
     to complete Hajj and 'Umra (Hajj-at-Tamattu')
     and if we follow the tradition of Allah's Apostle
     then Allah's Apostle did not finish his lhram till the
     Hadi had reached its destination (had been
     slaughtered). (i.e. Hajj-al-Qiran). (See Hadith
     No. 630) 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 783: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Hafsa said, "O Allah's Apostle! What is wrong
     with the people; they finished their Ihram after
     performing 'Umra, but you have not finished it
     after your 'Umra?" He replied, "I matted my hair
     and have garlanded my Hadi. So, I cannot finish
     my Ihram till I slaughter (my Hadi). " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 784: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) (got) his head shaved
     after performing his Hajj. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 785: 

     Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah! Be merciful to
     those who have their head shaved." The people
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! And (invoke Allah for)
     those who get their hair cut short." The Prophet
     said, "O Allah! Be merciful to those who have
     their head shaved." The people said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! And those who get their hair cut short."
     The Prophet said (the third time), "And to those
     who get their hair cut short." Nafi' said that the
     Prophet had said once or twice, "O Allah! Be
     merciful to those who get their head shaved," and
     on the fourth time he added, "And to those who
     have their hair cut short." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 786: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "O Allah! Forgive those
     who get their heads shaved." The people asked.
     "Also those who get their hair cut short?" The
     Prophet said, "O Allah! Forgive those who have
     their heads shaved." The people said, "Also
     those who get their hair cut short?" The Prophet
     (invoke Allah for those who have their heads
     shaved and) at the third time said, "also (forgive)
     those who get their hair cut short." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 787: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet and some of his companions got
     their heads shaved and some others got their hair
     cut short. Narrated Muawiya: I cut short the hair
     of Allah's Apostle with a long blade. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 788: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When the Prophet came to Mecca, he ordered
     his Companions to perform Tawaf round the
     Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa, to finish
     their Ihram and get their hair shaved off or cut
     short. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 789: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We performed Hajj with the Prophet and
     performed Tawaf-al-ifada on the Day of Nahr
     (slaughtering). Safiya got her menses and the
     Prophets desired from her what a husband
     desires from his wife. I said to him, "O Allah's
     Apostle! She is having her menses." He said, "Is
     she going to detain us?" We informed him that
     she had performed Tawaf-al-Ifada on the Day of
     Nahr. He said, "(Then you can) depart." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 790: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet was asked about the slaughtering,
     shaving (of the head), and the doing of Rami
     before or after the due times. He said, "There is
     no harm in that." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 791: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The Prophet was asked (as regards the
     ceremonies of Hajj) at Mina on the Day of Nahr
     and he replied that there was no harm. Then a
     man said to him, "I got my head shaved before
     slaughtering." He replied, "Slaughter (now) and
     there is no harm in it." (Another) man said, "I did
     the Rami (of the Jimar) after midday." The
     Prophet replied, "There was no harm in it." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 792: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr : 

     Allah's Apostle stopped (for a while near the
     Jimar at Mina) during his last Hajj and the people
     started asking him questions. A man said,
     "Ignorantly I got my head shaved before
     slaughtering." The Prophet replied, "Slaughter
     (now) and there is no harm in it." Another man
     said, "Unknowingly I slaughtered the Hadi before
     doing the Rami." The Prophet said, "Do Rami
     now and there is no harm in it." So, on that day,
     when the Prophet was asked about anything
     (about the ceremonies of Hajj) done before or
     after (its stated time) his reply was, "Do it (now)
     and there is no harm." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 793: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As: 

     I witnessed the Prophet when he was delivering
     the sermon on the Day of Nahr. A man stood up
     and said, "I thought that such and such was to be
     done before such and such. I got my hair shaved
     before slaughtering." (Another said), "I
     slaughtered the Hadi before doing the Rami." So,
     the people asked about many similar things. The
     Prophet said, "Do it (now) and there is no harm
     in all these cases." Whenever the Prophet was
     asked about anything on that day, he replied,
     "Do it (now) and there is no harm in it." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 794: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As: 

     Allah's Apostle stopped while on his she-camel
     (the subnarrator then narrated the Hadith as
     above, i.e. 793). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 795: 

     Narrated 'Ikrima: 

     Ibn Abbas said: "Allah's Apostle delivered a
     sermon on the Day of Nahr, and said, 'O people!
     (Tell me) what is the day today?' The people
     replied, 'It is the forbidden (sacred) day.' He
     asked again, 'What town is this?' They replied, 'It
     is the forbidden (Sacred) town.' He asked,
     'Which month is this?' They replied, 'It is the
     forbidden (Sacred) month.' He said, 'No doubt!
     Your blood, your properties, and your honor are
     sacred to one another like the sanctity of this day
     of yours, in this (sacred) town (Mecca) of yours,
     in this month of yours.' The Prophet repeated his
     statement again and again. After that he raised his
     head and said, 'O Allah! Haven't conveyed
     (Your Message) to them'. Haven't I conveyed
     Your Message to them?' " Ibn Abbas added,
     "By Him in Whose Hand my soul is, the following
     was his will (Prophet's will) to his followers:--It is
     incumbent upon those who are present to convey
     this information to those who are absent Beware
     don't renegade (as) disbelievers (turn into
     infidels) after me, Striking the necks (cutting the
     throats) of one another.' " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 796: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     I heard the Prophet delivering a sermon at
     'Arafat. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 797: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     The Prophet delivered to us a sermon on the Day
     of Nahr. He said, "Do you know what is the day
     today?" We said, "Allah and His Apostle know
     better." He remained silent till we thought that he
     might give that day another name. He said, "Isn't
     it the Day of Nahr?" We said, "It is." He further
     asked, "Which month is this?" We said, "Allah
     and His Apostle know better." He remained
     silent till we thought that he might give it another
     name. He then said, "Isn't it the month of
     Dhul-Hijja?" We replied: "Yes! It is." He further
     asked, "What town is this?" We replied, "Allah
     and His Apostle know it better." He remained
     silent till we thought that he might give it another
     name. He then said, "Isn't it the forbidden
     (Sacred) town (of Mecca)?" We said, "Yes. It
     is." He said, "No doubt, your blood and your
     properties are sacred to one another like the
     sanctity of this day of yours, in this month of
     yours, in this town of yours, till the day you meet
     your Lord. No doubt! Haven't I conveyed
     Allah's message to you? They said, "Yes." He
     said, "O Allah! Be witness. So it is incumbent
     upon those who are present to convey it (this
     information) to those who are absent because the
     informed one might comprehend it (what I have
     said) better than the present audience, who will
     convey it to him. Beware! Do not renegade (as)
     disbelievers after me by striking the necks
     (cutting the throats) of one another." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 798: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     At Mina, the Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Do you
     know what is the day today?" The people
     replied, "Allah and His Apostle know it better."
     He said, "It is the forbidden (sacred) day. And
     do you know what town is this?" They replied,
     "Allah and His Apostle know it better." He said,
     "This is the forbidden (Sacred) town (Mecca).
     And do you know which month is this?" The
     people replied, "Allah and His Apostle know it
     better." He said, "This is the forbidden (sacred)
     month." The Prophet added, "No doubt, Allah
     made your blood, your properties, and your
     honor sacred to one another like the sanctity of
     this day of yours in this month of yours in this
     town of yours." Narrated Ibn 'Umar: On the Day
     of Nahr (10th of Dhul-Hijja), the Prophet stood
     in between the Jamrat during his Hajj which he
     performed (as in the previous Hadith) and said,
     "This is the greatest Day (i.e. 10th of
     Dhul-Hijjah)." The Prophet started saying
     repeatedly, "O Allah! Be Witness (I have
     conveyed Your Message)." He then bade the
     people farewell. The people said, "This is
     Hajjat-al-Wada)." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 799: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet permitted (them). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 800: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar 

     That the Prophet allowed (as above). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 801: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Al-Abbas asked the permission from the Prophet
     to stay at Mecca during the nights of Mina in
     order to provide water to the people, so the
     Prophet allowed him. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 802: 

     Narrated Wabra: 

     I asked Ibn 'Umar, "When should I do the Rami
     of the Jimar?" He replied, "When your leader
     does that." I asked him again the same question.
     He replied, "We used to wait till the sun declined
     and then we would do the Rami (i.e. on the 11th
     and 12th of Dhul-Hijja)." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 803: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid: 

     'Abdullah, did the Rami from the middle of the
     valley. So, I said, "O, Abu 'Abdur-Rahman!
     Some people do the Rami (of the Jamra) from
     above it (i.e. from the top of the valley)." He
     said, "By Him except whom none has the right to
     be worshipped, this is the place from where the
     one on whom Surat-al-Baqara was revealed (i.e.
     Allah's Apostle) did the Rami." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 804: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid: 

     When 'Abdullah, reached the big Jamra (i.e.
     Jamrat-ul-Aqaba) he kept the Ka'ba on the left
     side and Mina on his right side and threw seven
     pebbles (at the Jamra) and said, "The one on
     whom Surat-al-Baqara was revealed (i.e. the
     Prophet) had done the Rami similarly." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 805: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid: 

     I performed Hajj with Ibn Masud , and saw him
     doing Rami of the big Jamra (Jamrat-ul-Aqaba)
     with seven small pebbles, keeping the Ka'ba on
     his left side and Mina on his right. He then said,
     "This is the place where the one on whom
     Surat-al-Baqara was revealed (i.e. Allah's
     Apostle ) stood." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 806: 

     Narrated Al-Amash: 

     I heard Al-Hajjaj saying on the pulpit, "The Sura
     in which Al-Baqara (the cow) is mentioned and
     the Sura in which the family of 'Imran is
     mentioned and the Sura in which the women
     (An-Nisa) is mentioned." I mentioned this to
     Ibrahim, and he said, 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid
     told me, 'I was with Ibn Masud, when he did the
     Rami of the Jamrat-ul-Aqaba. He went down the
     middle of the valley, and when he came near the
     tree (which was near the Jamra) he stood
     opposite to it and threw seven small pebbles and
     said: 'Allahu-Akbar' on throwing every pebble.'
     Then he said, 'By Him, except Whom none has
     the right to be worshipped, here (at this place)
     stood the one on whom Surat-al-Baqra was
     revealed (i.e. Allah's Apostle).' " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 807: 

     Narrated Salim: 

     Ibn 'Umar used to do Rami of the
     Jamrat-ud-Dunya (the Jamra near to the Khaif
     mosque) with seven small stones and used to
     recite Takbir on throwing every pebble. He then
     would go ahead till he reached the level ground
     where he would stand facing the Qibla for a long
     time to invoke (Allah) while raising his hands
     (while invoking). Then he would do Rami of the
     Jamrat-ul-Wusta (middle Jamra) and then he
     would go to the left towards the middle ground,
     where he would stand facing the Qibla. He
     would remain standing there for a long period to
     invoke (Allah) while raising his hands, and would
     stand there for a long period. Then he would do
     Rami of the Jamrat-ul-Aqaba from the middle of
     the valley, but he would not stay by it, and then
     he would leave and say, "I saw the Prophet
     doing like this." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 808: 

     Narrated Salim bin Abdullah: 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to do Rami of the
     Jamrat-ud-Dunya with seven small pebbles and
     used to recite Takbir on throwing each stone.
     He, then, would proceed further till he reached
     the level ground, where he would stay for a long
     time, facing the Qibla to invoke (Allah) while
     raising his hands. Then he would do Rami of the
     Jamrat-ul-Wusta similarly and would go to the
     left towards the level ground, where he would
     stand for a long time facing the Qibla to invoke
     (Allah) while raising his hands. Then he would do
     Rami of the Jamrat-ul-'Aqaba from the middle of
     the valley, but he would not stay by it. Ibn 'Umar
     used to say, "I saw Allah's Apostle doing like
     that." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 809: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Qasim: 

     I heard my father who was the best man of his
     age, saying, "I heard 'Aisha saying, 'I perfumed
     Allah's Apostle with my own hands before
     finishing his Ihram while yet he has not performed
     Tawaf-al-Ifada.' She spread her hands (while
     saying so.)" 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 810: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     The people were ordered to perform the Tawaf
     of the Ka'ba (Tawaf-al-Wada') as the lastly
     thing, before leaving (Mecca), except the
     menstruating women who were excused. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 811: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet offered the Zuhr, 'Asr, Maghrib and
     the 'Isha' prayers and slept for a while at a place
     called Al-Mahassab and then rode to the Ka'ba
     and performed Tawaf round it . 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 812: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Safiya bint Huyay, the wife of the Prophet got
     her menses, and Allah's Apostle was informed of
     that. He said, "Would she delay us?" The people
     said, "She has already performed
     Tawaf-al-Ifada." He said, "Therefore she will not
     (delay us)." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 813: 

     Narrated 'Ikrima: 

     The people of Medina asked Ibn Abbas about a
     woman who got her menses after performing
     Tawaf-al-Ifada. He said, "She could depart
     (from Mecca)." They said, "We will not act on
     your verdict and ignore the verdict of Zaid." Ibn
     Abbas said, "When you reach Medina, inquire
     about it." So, when they reached Medina they
     asked (about that). One of those whom they
     asked was Um Sulaim. She told them the
     narration of Safiya (812). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 814: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     A menstruating woman was allowed to leave
     Mecca if she had done Tawaf-al-Ifada. Tawus (a
     sub-narrator) said from his father, "I heard Ibn
     'Umar saying that she would not depart. Then
     later I heard him saying that the Prophet had
     allowed them (menstruating women) to depart." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 815: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We set out with the Prophet with the intention of
     performing Hajj only. The Prophet reached
     Mecca and performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and
     between Safa and Marwa and did not finish the
     Ihram, because he had the Hadi with him. His
     companions and his wives performed Tawaf (of
     the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa), and
     those who had no Hadi with them finished their
     Ihram. I got the menses and performed all the
     ceremonies of Hajj. So, when the Night of
     Hasba (night of departure) came, I said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! All your companions are
     returning with Hajj and 'Umra except me." He
     asked me, "Didn't you perform Tawaf of the
     Ka'ba (Umra) when you reached Mecca?" I
     said, "No." He said, "Go to Tan'im with your
     brother 'Abdur-Rahman, and assume Ihram for
     'Umra and I will wait for you at such and such a
     place." So I went with 'Abdur-Rahman to Tan'im
     and assumed Ihram for 'Umra. Then Safiya bint
     Huyay got menses. The Prophet said, " 'Aqra
     Halqa! You will detain us! Didn't you perform
     Tawaf-al-Ifada on the Day of Nahr
     (slaughtering)?" She said, "Yes, I did." He said,
     "Then there is no harm, depart." So I met the
     Prophet when he was ascending the heights
     towards Mecca and I was descending, or
     vice-versa. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 816: 

     Narrated 'Abdul-Aziz bin Rufai: 

     I asked Anas bin Malik, "Tell me something you
     have observed about the Prophet concerning
     where he offered the Zuhr prayer on the Day of
     Tarwiya (8th Dhul-Hijja)." Anas replied, "He
     offered it at Mina." I said, "Where did he offer
     the Asr prayer on the Day of Nafr (day of
     departure from Mina)?" He replied, "At
     Al-Abtah," and added, "You should do as your
     leaders do." 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 817: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet offered the Zuhr, 'Asr, Maghrib and
     'Isha' prayers and slept for a while at a place
     called Al-Mahassab and then he rode towards
     the Ka'ba and performed Tawaf (al-Wada'). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 818: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     It (i.e. Al-Abtah) was a place where the Prophet
     used to camp so that it might be easier for him to
     depart. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 819: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     Staying at Al-Mahassab is not one of the
     ceremonies (of Hajj), but Al-Mahassab is a
     place where Allah's Apostle camped (during his
     Hajjat-ul-wida). 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 820: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar used to spend the night at Dhi-Tuwa
     in between the two Thaniyas and then he would
     enter Mecca through the Thaniya which is at the
     higher region of Mecca, and whenever he came
     to Mecca for Hajj or 'Umra, he never made his
     she camel kneel down except near the gate of the
     Masjid (Sacred Mosque) and then he would
     enter (it) and go to the Black (stone) Corner and
     start from there circumambulating the Ka'ba
     seven times: hastening in the first three rounds
     (Ramal) and walking in the last four. On finishing,
     he would offer two Rakat prayer and set out to
     perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa before
     returning to his dwelling place. On returning (to
     Medina) from Hajj or 'Umra, he used to make
     his camel kneel down at Al-Batha which is at
     Dhu-l-Hulaifa, the place where the Prophet used
     to make his camel kneel down. 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 821: 

     Narrated Khalid bin Al-Harith: 

     'Ubaidullah was asked about Al Mahassab.
     'Ubaidullah narrated: Nafi' said, 'Allah's
     Apostles, 'Umar and Ibn 'Umar camped there."
     Nafi' added, "Ibn 'Umar used to offer the Zuhr
     and 'Asr prayers at it (i.e. Al-Mahassab)." I think
     he mentioned the Maghrib prayer also. I said, "I
     don't doubt about 'Isha' (i.e. he used to offer it
     there also), and he used to sleep there for a
     while. He used to say, 'The Prophet used to do
     the same.' " 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 822: 

     Narrated Ibn ' Abbas : 

     Dhul-Majaz and 'Ukaz were the markets of the
     people during the pre-lslamic period of
     ignorance. When the people embraced Islam,
     they disliked to do bargaining there till the
     following Holy Verses were revealed:-- There is
     no harm for you If you seek of the bounty Of
     your Lord (during Hajj by trading, etc.) (2.198) 


Volume 2, Book 26, Number 823: 

     Narrated ' Aisha: 

     Safiya got her menses on the night of Nafr
     (departure from Hajj), and she said, "I see that I
     will detain you." The Prophet said, "Aqra Halqa!
     Did she perform the Tawaf on the Day of Nahr
     (slaughtering)?" Somebody replied in the
     affirmative. He said, "Then depart." (Different
     narrators mentioned that) 'Aisha said, "We set
     out with Allah's Apostle (from Medina) with the
     intention of performing Hajj only. When we
     reached Mecca, he ordered us to finish the
     Ihram. When it was the night of Nafr (departure),
     Safiya bint Huyay got her menses. The Prophet
     said, "Halqa Aqra! I think that she will detain
     you," and added, "Did you perform the Tawaf
     (Al-Ifada) on the Day of Nahr (slaughtering)?"
     She replied, "Yes." He said, "Then depart." I
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have not (done the
     Umra)." He replied, "Perform 'Umra from
     Tan'im." My brother went with me and we came
     across the Prophet in the last part of the night.
     He said, "Wait at such and such a place." 





