Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 1: 

               Revelation 



Volume 1, Book 1, Number 1: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The reward of
     deeds depends upon the intentions and every
     person will get the reward according to what he
     has intended. So whoever emigrated for worldly
     benefits or for a woman to marry, his emigration
     was for what he emigrated for." 


Volume 1, Book 1, Number 2: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the mother of the faithful believers) Al-Harith bin
     Hisham asked Allah's Apostle "O Allah's
     Apostle! How is the Divine Inspiration revealed
     to you?" Allah's Apostle replied, "Sometimes it is
     (revealed) like the ringing of a bell, this form of
     Inspiration is the hardest of all and then this state
     passes ' off after I have grasped what is inspired.
     Sometimes the Angel comes in the form of a man
     and talks to me and I grasp whatever he says."
     'Aisha added: Verily I saw the Prophet being
     inspired Divinely on a very cold day and noticed
     the Sweat dropping from his forehead (as the
     Inspiration was over). 


Volume 1, Book 1, Number 3: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the mother of the faithful believers) The
     commencement of the Divine Inspiration to
     Allah's Apostle was in the form of good dreams
     which came true like bright day light, and then the
     love of seclusion was bestowed upon him. He
     used to go in seclusion in the cave of Hira where
     he used to worship (Allah alone) continuously for
     many days before his desire to see his family. He
     used to take with him the journey food for the
     stay and then come back to (his wife) Khadija to
     take his food like-wise again till suddenly the
     Truth descended upon him while he was in the
     cave of Hira. The angel came to him and asked
     him to read. The Prophet replied, "I do not know
     how to read. 

     The Prophet added, "The angel caught me
     (forcefully) and pressed me so hard that I could
     not bear it any more. He then released me and
     again asked me to read and I replied, 'I do not
     know how to read.' Thereupon he caught me
     again and pressed me a second time till I could
     not bear it any more. He then released me and
     again asked me to read but again I replied, 'I do
     not know how to read (or what shall I read)?'
     Thereupon he caught me for the third time and
     pressed me, and then released me and said,
     'Read in the name of your Lord, who has created
     (all that exists) has created man from a clot.
     Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous."
     (96.1, 96.2, 96.3) Then Allah's Apostle returned
     with the Inspiration and with his heart beating
     severely. Then he went to Khadija bint
     Khuwailid and said, "Cover me! Cover me!"
     They covered him till his fear was over and after
     that he told her everything that had happened and
     said, "I fear that something may happen to me."
     Khadija replied, "Never! By Allah, Allah will
     never disgrace you. You keep good relations
     with your Kith and kin, help the poor and the
     destitute, serve your guests generously and assist
     the deserving calamity-afflicted ones." 

     Khadija then accompanied him to her cousin
     Waraqa bin Naufal bin Asad bin 'Abdul 'Uzza,
     who, during the PreIslamic Period became a
     Christian and used to write the writing with
     Hebrew letters. He would write from the Gospel
     in Hebrew as much as Allah wished him to write.
     He was an old man and had lost his eyesight.
     Khadija said to Waraqa, "Listen to the story of
     your nephew, O my cousin!" Waraqa asked, "O
     my nephew! What have you seen?" Allah's
     Apostle described whatever he had seen.
     Waraqa said, "This is the same one who keeps
     the secrets (angel Gabriel) whom Allah had sent
     to Moses. I wish I were young and could live up
     to the time when your people would turn you
     out." Allah's Apostle asked, "Will they drive me
     out?" Waraqa replied in the affirmative and said,
     "Anyone (man) who came with something similar
     to what you have brought was treated with
     hostility; and if I should remain alive till the day
     when you will be turned out then I would support
     you strongly." But after a few days Waraqa died
     and the Divine Inspiration was also paused for a
     while. 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari while
     talking about the period of pause in revelation
     reporting the speech of the Prophet "While I was
     walking, all of a sudden I heard a voice from the
     sky. I looked up and saw the same angel who
     had visited me at the cave of Hira' sitting on a
     chair between the sky and the earth. I got afraid
     of him and came back home and said, 'Wrap me
     (in blankets).' And then Allah revealed the
     following Holy Verses (of Quran): 

     'O you (i.e. Muhammad)! wrapped up in
     garments!' Arise and warn (the people against
     Allah's Punishment),... up to 'and desert the
     idols.' (74.1-5) After this the revelation started
     coming strongly, frequently and regularly." 


Volume 1, Book 1, Number 4: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     Ibn 'Abbas in the explanation of the Statement of
     Allah. 'Move not your tongue concerning (the
     Quran) to make haste therewith." (75.16) Said
     "Allah's Apostle used to bear the revelation with
     great trouble and used to move his lips (quickly)
     with the Inspiration." Ibn 'Abbas moved his lips
     saying, "I am moving my lips in front of you as
     Allah's Apostle used to move his." Said moved
     his lips saying: "I am moving my lips, as I saw Ibn
     'Abbas moving his." Ibn 'Abbas added, "So
     Allah revealed 'Move not your tongue concerning
     (the Qur'an) to make haste therewith. It is for us
     to collect it and to give you (O Muhammad) the
     ability to recite it (the Qur'an) (75.16-17) which
     means that Allah will make him (the Prophet )
     remember the portion of the Qur'an which was
     revealed at that time by heart and recite it. The
     Statement of Allah: And 'When we have recited
     it to you (O Muhammad through Gabriel) then
     you follow its (Qur'an) recital' (75.18) means
     'listen to it and be silent.' Then it is for Us (Allah)
     to make It clear to you' (75.19) means 'Then it is
     (for Allah) to make you recite it (and its meaning
     will be clear by itself through your tongue).
     Afterwards, Allah's Apostle used to listen to
     Gabriel whenever he came and after his
     departure he used to recite it as Gabriel had
     recited it." 


Volume 1, Book 1, Number 5: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle was the most generous of all the
     people, and he used to reach the peak in
     generosity in the month of Ramadan when
     Gabriel met him. Gabriel used to meet him every
     night of Ramadan to teach him the Qur'an.
     Allah's Apostle was the most generous person,
     even more generous than the strong
     uncontrollable wind (in readiness and haste to do
     charitable deeds). 


Volume 1, Book 1, Number 6: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     Abu Sufyan bin Harb informed me that Heraclius
     had sent a messenger to him while he had been
     accompanying a caravan from Quraish. They
     were merchants doing business in Sham (Syria,
     Palestine, Lebanon and Jordan), at the time when
     Allah's Apostle had truce with Abu Sufyan and
     Quraish infidels. So Abu Sufyan and his
     companions went to Heraclius at Ilya
     (Jerusalem). Heraclius called them in the court
     and he had all the senior Roman dignitaries
     around him. He called for his translator who,
     translating Heraclius's question said to them,
     "Who amongst you is closely related to that man
     who claims to be a Prophet?" Abu Sufyan
     replied, "I am the nearest relative to him
     (amongst the group)." 

     Heraclius said, "Bring him (Abu Sufyan) close to
     me and make his companions stand behind him."
     Abu Sufyan added, Heraclius told his translator
     to tell my companions that he wanted to put
     some questions to me regarding that man (The
     Prophet) and that if I told a lie they (my
     companions) should contradict me." Abu Sufyan
     added, "By Allah! Had I not been afraid of my
     companions labeling me a liar, I would not have
     spoken the truth about the Prophet. The first
     question he asked me about him was: 

     'What is his family status amongst you?' 

     I replied, 'He belongs to a good (noble) family
     amongst us.' 

     Heraclius further asked, 'Has anybody amongst
     you ever claimed the same (i.e. to be a Prophet)
     before him?' 

     I replied, 'No.' 

     He said, 'Was anybody amongst his ancestors a
     king?' 

     I replied, 'No.' 

     Heraclius asked, 'Do the nobles or the poor
     follow him?' 

     I replied, 'It is the poor who follow him.' 

     He said, 'Are his followers increasing decreasing
     (day by day)?' 

     I replied, 'They are increasing.' 

     He then asked, 'Does anybody amongst those
     who embrace his religion become displeased and
     renounce the religion afterwards?' 

     I replied, 'No.' 

     Heraclius said, 'Have you ever accused him of
     telling lies before his claim (to be a Prophet)?' 

     I replied, 'No. ' 

     Heraclius said, 'Does he break his promises?' 

     I replied, 'No. We are at truce with him but we
     do not know what he will do in it.' I could not
     find opportunity to say anything against him
     except that. 

     Heraclius asked, 'Have you ever had a war with
     him?' 

     I replied, 'Yes.' 

     Then he said, 'What was the outcome of the
     battles?' 

     I replied, 'Sometimes he was victorious and
     sometimes we.' 

     Heraclius said, 'What does he order you to do?' 

     I said, 'He tells us to worship Allah and Allah
     alone and not to worship anything along with
     Him, and to renounce all that our ancestors had
     said. He orders us to pray, to speak the truth, to
     be chaste and to keep good relations with our
     Kith and kin.' 

     Heraclius asked the translator to convey to me
     the following, I asked you about his family and
     your reply was that he belonged to a very noble
     family. In fact all the Apostles come from noble
     families amongst their respective peoples. I
     questioned you whether anybody else amongst
     you claimed such a thing, your reply was in the
     negative. If the answer had been in the
     affirmative, I would have thought that this man
     was following the previous man's statement. Then
     I asked you whether anyone of his ancestors was
     a king. Your reply was in the negative, and if it
     had been in the affirmative, I would have thought
     that this man wanted to take back his ancestral
     kingdom. 

     I further asked whether he was ever accused of
     telling lies before he said what he said, and your
     reply was in the negative. So I wondered how a
     person who does not tell a lie about others could
     ever tell a lie about Allah. I, then asked you
     whether the rich people followed him or the
     poor. You replied that it was the poor who
     followed him. And in fact all the Apostle have
     been followed by this very class of people. Then
     I asked you whether his followers were
     increasing or decreasing. You replied that they
     were increasing, and in fact this is the way of true
     faith, till it is complete in all respects. I further
     asked you whether there was anybody, who,
     after embracing his religion, became displeased
     and discarded his religion. Your reply was in the
     negative, and in fact this is (the sign of) true faith,
     when its delight enters the hearts and mixes with
     them completely. I asked you whether he had
     ever betrayed. You replied in the negative and
     likewise the Apostles never betray. Then I asked
     you what he ordered you to do. You replied that
     he ordered you to worship Allah and Allah alone
     and not to worship any thing along with Him and
     forbade you to worship idols and ordered you to
     pray, to speak the truth and to be chaste. If what
     you have said is true, he will very soon occupy
     this place underneath my feet and I knew it (from
     the scriptures) that he was going to appear but I
     did not know that he would be from you, and if I
     could reach him definitely, I would go
     immediately to meet him and if I were with him, I
     would certainly wash his feet.' Heraclius then
     asked for the letter addressed by Allah's Apostle

     which was delivered by Dihya to the Governor of
     Busra, who forwarded it to Heraclius to read.
     The contents of the letter were as follows: "In the
     name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful (This
     letter is) from Muhammad the slave of Allah and
     His Apostle to Heraclius the ruler of Byzantine.
     Peace be upon him, who follows the right path.
     Furthermore I invite you to Islam, and if you
     become a Muslim you will be safe, and Allah will
     double your reward, and if you reject this
     invitation of Islam you will be committing a sin by
     misguiding your Arisiyin (peasants). (And I recite
     to you Allah's Statement:) 

     'O people of the scripture! Come to a word
     common to you and us that we worship none but
     Allah and that we associate nothing in worship
     with Him, and that none of us shall take others as
     Lords beside Allah. Then, if they turn away, say:
     Bear witness that we are Muslims (those who
     have surrendered to Allah).' (3:64). 

     Abu Sufyan then added, "When Heraclius had
     finished his speech and had read the letter, there
     was a great hue and cry in the Royal Court. So
     we were turned out of the court. I told my
     companions that the question of
     Ibn-Abi-Kabsha) (the Prophet Muhammad) has
     become so prominent that even the King of Bani
     Al-Asfar (Byzantine) is afraid of him. Then I
     started to become sure that he (the Prophet)
     would be the conqueror in the near future till I
     embraced Islam (i.e. Allah guided me to it)." 

     The sub narrator adds, "Ibn An-Natur was the
     Governor of llya' (Jerusalem) and Heraclius was
     the head of the Christians of Sham. Ibn
     An-Natur narrates that once while Heraclius was
     visiting ilya' (Jerusalem), he got up in the morning
     with a sad mood. Some of his priests asked him
     why he was in that mood? Heraclius was a
     foreteller and an astrologer. He replied, 'At night
     when I looked at the stars, I saw that the leader
     of those who practice circumcision had appeared
     (become the conqueror). Who are they who
     practice circumcision?' The people replied,
     'Except the Jews nobody practices circumcision,
     so you should not be afraid of them (Jews). 

     'Just Issue orders to kill every Jew present in the
     country.' 

     While they were discussing it, a messenger sent
     by the king of Ghassan to convey the news of
     Allah's Apostle to Heraclius was brought in.
     Having heard the news, he (Heraclius) ordered
     the people to go and see whether the messenger
     of Ghassan was circumcised. The people, after
     seeing him, told Heraclius that he was
     circumcised. Heraclius then asked him about the
     Arabs. The messenger replied, 'Arabs also
     practice circumcision.' 

     (After hearing that) Heraclius remarked that
     sovereignty of the 'Arabs had appeared.
     Heraclius then wrote a letter to his friend in
     Rome who was as good as Heraclius in
     knowledge. Heraclius then left for Homs. (a town
     in Syrian and stayed there till he received the
     reply of his letter from his friend who agreed with
     him in his opinion about the emergence of the
     Prophet and the fact that he was a Prophet. On
     that Heraclius invited all the heads of the
     Byzantines to assemble in his palace at Homs.
     When they assembled, he ordered that all the
     doors of his palace be closed. Then he came out
     and said, 'O Byzantines! If success is your desire
     and if you seek right guidance and want your
     empire to remain then give a pledge of allegiance
     to this Prophet (i.e. embrace Islam).' 

     (On hearing the views of Heraclius) the people
     ran towards the gates of the palace like onagers
     but found the doors closed. Heraclius realized
     their hatred towards Islam and when he lost the
     hope of their embracing Islam, he ordered that
     they should be brought back in audience. 

     (When they returned) he said, 'What already said
     was just to test the strength of your conviction
     and I have seen it.' The people prostrated before
     him and became pleased with him, and this was
     the end of Heraclius's story (in connection with
     his faith). 

Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 2: 

                   Belief 



Volume 1, Book 2, Number 7: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said: Islam is based on (the
     following) five (principles): 

     1. To testify that none has the right to be
     worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is Allah's
     Apostle. 

     2. To offer the (compulsory congregational)
     prayers dutifully and perfectly. 

     3. To pay Zakat (i.e. obligatory charity) . 

     4. To perform Hajj. (i.e. Pilgrimage to Mecca) 

     5. To observe fast during the month of Ramadan.


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 8: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Faith (Belief) consists of more
     than sixty branches (i.e. parts). And Haya (This
     term "Haya" covers a large number of concepts
     which are to be taken together; amongst them
     are self respect, modesty, bashfulness, and
     scruple, etc.) is a part of faith." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 9: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     The Prophet said, "A Muslim is the one who
     avoids harming Muslims with his tongue and
     hands. And a Muhajir (emigrant) is the one who
     gives up (abandons) all what Allah has
     forbidden." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 10: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     Some people asked Allah's Apostle, "Whose
     Islam is the best? i.e. (Who is a very good
     Muslim)?" He replied, "One who avoids harming
     the Muslims with his tongue and hands." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 11: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     A man asked the Prophet , "What sort of deeds
     or (what qualities of) Islam are good?" The
     Prophet replied, 'To feed (the poor) and greet
     those whom you know and those whom you do
     not Know (See Hadith No. 27). 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 12: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "None of you will have faith till
     he wishes for his (Muslim) brother what he likes
     for himself." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 13: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     "Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hands
     my life is, none of you will have faith till he loves
     me more than his father and his children." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 14: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said "None of you will have faith till
     he loves me more than his father, his children and
     all mankind." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 15: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever possesses the
     following three qualities will have the sweetness
     (delight) of faith: 

     1. The one to whom Allah and His Apostle
     becomes dearer than anything else. 

     2. Who loves a person and he loves him only for
     Allah's sake. 

     3. Who hates to revert to Atheism (disbelief) as
     he hates to be thrown into the fire." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 16: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Love for the Ansar is a sign
     of faith and hatred for the Ansar is a sign of
     hypocrisy." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 17: 

     Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit: 

     who took part in the battle of Badr and was a
     Naqib (a person heading a group of six persons),
     on the night of Al-'Aqaba pledge: Allah's Apostle
     said while a group of his companions were
     around him, "Swear allegiance to me for: 

     1. Not to join anything in worship along with
     Allah. 

     2. Not to steal. 

     3. Not to commit illegal sexual intercourse. 

     4. Not to kill your children. 

     5. Not to accuse an innocent person (to spread
     such an accusation among people). 

     6. Not to be disobedient (when ordered) to do
     good deed." 

     The Prophet added: "Whoever among you fulfills
     his pledge will be rewarded by Allah. And
     whoever indulges in any one of them (except the
     ascription of partners to Allah) and gets the
     punishment in this world, that punishment will be
     an expiation for that sin. And if one indulges in
     any of them, and Allah conceals his sin, it is up to
     Him to forgive or punish him (in the Hereafter)."
     'Ubada bin As-Samit added: "So we swore
     allegiance for these." (points to Allah's Apostle) 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 18: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A time will come that the
     best property of a Muslim will be sheep which he
     will take on the top of mountains and the places
     of rainfall (valleys) so as to flee with his religion
     from afflictions." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 19: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle ordered the Muslims
     to do something, he used to order them deeds
     which were easy for them to do, (according to
     their strength endurance). They said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! We are not like you. Allah has forgiven
     your past and future sins." So Allah's Apostle
     became angry and it was apparent on his face.
     He said, "I am the most Allah fearing, and know
     Allah better than all of you do." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 20: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever possesses the
     following three qualities will taste the sweetness
     of faith: 

     1. The one to whom Allah and His Apostle
     become dearer than anything else. 

     2. Who loves a person and he loves him only for
     Allah's sake. 

     3. Who hates to revert to disbelief (Atheism)
     after Allah has brought (saved) him out from it,
     as he hates to be thrown in fire." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 21: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet said, "When the people of Paradise
     will enter Paradise and the people of Hell will go
     to Hell, Allah will order those who have had faith
     equal to the weight of a grain of mustard seed to
     be taken out from Hell. So they will be taken out
     but (by then) they will be blackened (charred).
     Then they will be put in the river of Haya' (rain)
     or Hayat (life) (the Narrator is in doubt as to
     which is the right term), and they will revive like a
     grain that grows near the bank of a flood
     channel. Don't you see that it comes out yellow
     and twisted" 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 22: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping I saw
     (in a dream) some people wearing shirts of which
     some were reaching up to the breasts only while
     others were even shorter than that. Umar bin
     Al-Khattab was shown wearing a shirt that he
     was dragging." The people asked, "How did you
     interpret it? (What is its interpretation) O Allah's
     Apostle?" He (the Prophet ) replied, "It is the
     Religion." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 23: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar): 

     Once Allah's Apostle passed by an Ansari (man)
     who was admonishing to his brother regarding
     Haya'. On that Allah's Apostle said, "Leave him
     as Haya' is a part of faith." (See Hadith No. 8) 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 24: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said: "I have been ordered (by
     Allah) to fight against the people until they testify
     that none has the right to be worshipped but
     Allah and that Muhammad is Allah's Apostle,
     and offer the prayers perfectly and give the
     obligatory charity, so if they perform a that, then
     they save their lives an property from me except
     for Islamic laws and then their reckoning
     (accounts) will be done by Allah." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 25: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle was asked, "What is the best
     deed?" He replied, "To believe in Allah and His
     Apostle (Muhammad). The questioner then
     asked, "What is the next (in goodness)? He
     replied, "To participate in Jihad (religious fighting)
     in Allah's Cause." The questioner again asked,
     "What is the next (in goodness)?" He replied, "To
     perform Hajj (Pilgrim age to Mecca) 'Mubrur,
     (which is accepted by Allah and is performed
     with the intention of seeking Allah's pleasure only
     and not to show off and without committing a sin
     and in accordance with the traditions of the
     Prophet)." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 26: 

     Narrated Sa'd: 

     Allah's Apostle distributed (Zakat) amongst (a
     group of) people while I was sitting there but
     Allah's Apostle left a man whom I thought the
     best of the lot. I asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Why
     have you left that person? By Allah I regard him
     as a faithful believer." The Prophet commented:
     "Or merely a Muslim." I remained quiet for a
     while, but could not help repeating my question
     because of what I knew about him. And then
     asked Allah's Apostle, "Why have you left so
     and so? By Allah! He is a faithful believer." The
     Prophet again said, "Or merely a Muslim." And I
     could not help repeating my question because of
     what I knew about him. Then the Prophet said,
     "O Sa'd! I give to a person while another is
     dearer to me, for fear that he might be thrown on
     his face in the Fire by Allah." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 27: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     A person asked Allah's Apostle . "What (sort of)
     deeds in or (what qualities of) Islam are good?"
     He replied, "To feed (the poor) and greet those
     whom you know and those whom you don't
     know." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 28: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said: "I was shown the Hell-fire and
     that the majority of its dwellers were women who
     were ungrateful." It was asked, "Do they
     disbelieve in Allah?" (or are they ungrateful to
     Allah?) He replied, "They are ungrateful to their
     husbands and are ungrateful for the favors and
     the good (charitable deeds) done to them. If you
     have always been good (benevolent) to one of
     them and then she sees something in you (not of
     her liking), she will say, 'I have never received
     any good from you." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 29: 

     Narrated Al-Ma'rur: 

     At Ar-Rabadha I met Abu Dhar who was
     wearing a cloak, and his slave, too, was wearing
     a similar one. I asked about the reason for it. He
     replied, "I abused a person by calling his mother
     with bad names." The Prophet said to me, 'O
     Abu Dhar! Did you abuse him by calling his
     mother with bad names You still have some
     characteristics of ignorance. Your slaves are your
     brothers and Allah has put them under your
     command. So whoever has a brother under his
     command should feed him of what he eats and
     dress him of what he wears. Do not ask them
     (slaves) to do things beyond their capacity
     (power) and if you do so, then help them.' " 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 30: 

     Narrated Al-Ahnaf bin Qais: 

     While I was going to help this man ('Ali Ibn Abi
     Talib), Abu Bakra met me and asked, "Where
     are you going?" I replied, "I am going to help that
     person." He said, "Go back for I have heard
     Allah's Apostle saying, 'When two Muslims fight
     (meet) each other with their swords, both the
     murderer as well as the murdered will go to the
     Hell-fire.' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! It is all right
     for the murderer but what about the murdered
     one?' Allah's Apostle replied, "He surely had the
     intention to kill his companion." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 31: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     When the following Verse was revealed: "It is
     those who believe and confuse not their belief
     with wrong (worshipping others besides Allah.)"
     (6:83), the companions of Allah's Apostle asked,
     "Who is amongst us who had not done injustice
     (wrong)?" Allah revealed: "No doubt, joining
     others in worship with Allah is a great injustice
     (wrong) indeed." (31.13) 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 32: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The signs of a hypocrite are
     three: 

     1. Whenever he speaks, he tells a lie. 

     2. Whenever he promises, he always breaks it
     (his promise ). 

     3. If you trust him, he proves to be dishonest. (If
     you keep something as a trust with him, he will
     not return it.)" 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 33: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever has the following
     four (characteristics) will be a pure hypocrite and
     whoever has one of the following four
     characteristics will have one characteristic of
     hypocrisy unless and until he gives it up. 

     1. Whenever he is entrusted, he betrays. 

     2. Whenever he speaks, he tells a lie. 

     3. Whenever he makes a covenant, he proves
     treacherous. 

     4. Whenever he quarrels, he behaves in a very
     imprudent, evil and insulting manner." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 34: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever establishes the
     prayers on the night of Qadr out of sincere faith
     and hoping to attain Allah's rewards (not to show
     off) then all his past sins will be forgiven." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 35: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The person who participates
     in (Holy battles) in Allah's cause and nothing
     compels him to do so except belief in Allah and
     His Apostles, will be recompensed by Allah
     either with a reward, or booty (if he survives) or
     will be admitted to Paradise (if he is killed in the
     battle as a martyr). Had I not found it difficult for
     my followers, then I would not remain behind any
     sariya going for Jihad and I would have loved to
     be martyred in Allah's cause and then made alive,
     and then martyred and then made alive, and then
     again martyred in His cause." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 36: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said: "Whoever establishes
     prayers during the nights of Ramadan faithfully
     out of sincere faith and hoping to attain Allah's
     rewards (not for showing off), all his past sins will
     be forgiven." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 37: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever observes fasts
     during the month of Ramadan out of sincere faith,
     and hoping to attain Allah's rewards, then all his
     past sins will be forgiven." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 38: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Religion is very easy and
     whoever overburdens himself in his religion will
     not be able to continue in that way. So you
     should not be extremists, but try to be near to
     perfection and receive the good tidings that you
     will be rewarded; and gain strength by
     worshipping in the mornings, the nights." (See
     Fath-ul-Bari, Page 102, Vol 1). 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 39: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' (bin 'Azib): 

     When the Prophet came to Medina, he stayed
     first with his grandfathers or maternal uncles from
     Ansar. He offered his prayers facing
     Baitul-Maqdis (Jerusalem) for sixteen or
     seventeen months, but he wished that he could
     pray facing the Ka'ba (at Mecca). The first
     prayer which he offered facing the Ka'ba was the
     'Asr prayer in the company of some people.
     Then one of those who had offered that prayer
     with him came out and passed by some people in
     a mosque who were bowing during their prayers
     (facing Jerusalem). He said addressing them, "By
     Allah, I testify that I have prayed with Allah's
     Apostle facing Mecca (Ka'ba).' Hearing that,
     those people changed their direction towards the
     Ka'ba immediately. Jews and the people of the
     scriptures used to be pleased to see the Prophet
     facing Jerusalem in prayers but when he changed
     his direction towards the Ka'ba, during the
     prayers, they disapproved of it. 

     Al-Bara' added, "Before we changed our
     direction towards the Ka'ba (Mecca) in prayers,
     some Muslims had died or had been killed and
     we did not know what to say about them
     (regarding their prayers.) Allah then revealed:
     And Allah would never make your faith (prayers)
     to be lost (i.e. the prayers of those Muslims were
     valid).' " (2:143). 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 40: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If any one of you improve
     (follows strictly) his Islamic religion then his good
     deeds will be rewarded ten times to seven
     hundred times for each good deed and a bad
     deed will be recorded as it is." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 41: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Once the Prophet came while a woman was
     sitting with me. He said, "Who is she?" I replied,
     "She is so and so," and told him about her
     (excessive) praying. He said disapprovingly, "Do
     (good) deeds which is within your capacity
     (without being overtaxed) as Allah does not get
     tired (of giving rewards) but (surely) you will get
     tired and the best deed (act of Worship) in the
     sight of Allah is that which is done regularly." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 42: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever said "None has the
     right to be worshipped but Allah and has in his
     heart good (faith) equal to the weight of a barley
     grain will be taken out of Hell. And whoever
     said: "None has the right to be worshipped but
     Allah and has in his heart good (faith) equal to
     the weight of a wheat grain will be taken out of
     Hell. And whoever said, "None has the right to
     be worshipped but Allah and has in his heart
     good (faith) equal to the weight of an atom will
     be taken out of Hell." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 43: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     Once a Jew said to me, "O the chief of believers!
     There is a verse in your Holy Book Which is
     read by all of you (Muslims), and had it been
     revealed to us, we would have taken that day (on
     which it was revealed as a day of celebration."
     'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked, "Which is that
     verse?" The Jew replied, "This day I have
     perfected your religion For you, completed My
     favor upon you, And have chosen for you Islam
     as your religion." (5:3) 'Umar replied,"No doubt,
     we know when and where this verse was
     revealed to the Prophet. It was Friday and the
     Prophet was standing at 'Arafat (i.e. the Day of
     Hajj)" 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 44: 

     Narrated Talha bin 'Ubaidullah: 

     A man from Najd with unkempt hair came to
     Allah's Apostle and we heard his loud voice but
     could not understand what he was saying, till he
     came near and then we came to know that he
     was asking about Islam. Allah's Apostle said,
     "You have to offer prayers perfectly five times in
     a day and night (24 hours)." The man asked, "Is
     there any more (praying)?" Allah's Apostle
     replied, "No, but if you want to offer the Nawafil
     prayers (you can)." Allah's Apostle further said
     to him: "You have to observe fasts during the
     month of Ramad, an." The man asked, "Is there
     any more fasting?" Allah's Apostle replied, "No,
     but if you want to observe the Nawafil fasts (you
     can.)" Then Allah's Apostle further said to him,
     "You have to pay the Zakat (obligatory charity)."
     The man asked, "Is there any thing other than the
     Zakat for me to pay?" Allah's Apostle replied,
     "No, unless you want to give alms of your own."
     And then that man retreated saying, "By Allah! I
     will neither do less nor more than this." Allah's
     Apostle said, "If what he said is true, then he will
     be successful (i.e. he will be granted Paradise)." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 45: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "(A believer) who
     accompanies the funeral procession of a Muslim
     out of sincere faith and hoping to attain Allah's
     reward and remains with it till the funeral prayer
     is offered and the burial ceremonies are over, he
     will return with a reward of two Qirats. Each
     Qirat is like the size of the (Mount) Uhud. He
     who offers the funeral prayer only and returns
     before the burial, will return with the reward of
     one Qirat only." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 46: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "Abusing a Muslim is Fusuq
     (an evil doing) and killing him is Kufr (disbelief)."
     Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit: "Allah's Apostle
     went out to inform the people about the (date of
     the) night of decree (Al-Qadr) but there
     happened a quarrel between two Muslim men.
     The Prophet said, "I came out to inform you
     about (the date of) the night of Al-Qadr, but as
     so and so and so and so quarrelled, its
     knowledge was taken away (I forgot it) and
     maybe it was better for you. Now look for it in
     the 7th, the 9th and the 5th (of the last 10 nights
     of the month of Ramadan)." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 47: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     One day while the Prophet was sitting in the
     company of some people, (The angel) Gabriel
     came and asked, "What is faith?" Allah's Apostle
     replied, 'Faith is to believe in Allah, His angels,
     (the) meeting with Him, His Apostles, and to
     believe in Resurrection." Then he further asked,
     "What is Islam?" Allah's Apostle replied, "To
     worship Allah Alone and none else, to offer
     prayers perfectly to pay the compulsory charity
     (Zakat) and to observe fasts during the month of
     Ramadan." Then he further asked, "What is Ihsan
     (perfection)?" Allah's Apostle replied, "To
     worship Allah as if you see Him, and if you
     cannot achieve this state of devotion then you
     must consider that He is looking at you." Then he
     further asked, "When will the Hour be
     established?" Allah's Apostle replied, "The
     answerer has no better knowledge than the
     questioner. But I will inform you about its
     portents. 

     1. When a slave (lady) gives birth to her master. 

     2. When the shepherds of black camels start
     boasting and competing with others in the
     construction of higher buildings. And the Hour is
     one of five things which nobody knows except
     Allah. 

     The Prophet then recited: "Verily, with Allah
     (Alone) is the knowledge of the Hour--." (31.
     34) Then that man (Gabriel) left and the Prophet
     asked his companions to call him back, but they
     could not see him. Then the Prophet said, "That
     was Gabriel who came to teach the people their
     religion." Abu 'Abdullah said: He (the Prophet)
     considered all that as a part of faith. 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 48: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     I was informed by Abu Sufyan that Heraclius
     said to him, "I asked you whether they (followers
     of Muhammad) were increasing or decreasing.
     You replied that they were increasing. And in
     fact, this is the way of true Faith till it is complete
     in all respects. I further asked you whether there
     was anybody, who, after embracing his (the
     Prophets) religion (Islam) became displeased and
     discarded it. You replied in the negative, and in
     fact, this is (a sign of) true faith. When its delight
     enters the heart and mixes with them completely,
     nobody can be displeased with it." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 49: 

     Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'Both legal and
     illegal things are evident but in between them
     there are doubtful (suspicious) things and most of
     the people have no knowledge about them. So
     whoever saves himself from these suspicious
     things saves his religion and his honor. And
     whoever indulges in these suspicious things is like
     a shepherd who grazes (his animals) near the
     Hima (private pasture) of someone else and at
     any moment he is liable to get in it. (O people!)
     Beware! Every king has a Hima and the Hima of
     Allah on the earth is His illegal (forbidden) things.
     Beware! There is a piece of flesh in the body if it
     becomes good (reformed) the whole body
     becomes good but if it gets spoilt the whole body
     gets spoilt and that is the heart. 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 50: 

     Narrated Abu Jamra: 

     I used to sit with Ibn 'Abbas and he made me sit
     on his sitting place. He requested me to stay with
     him in order that he might give me a share from
     his property. So I stayed with him for two
     months. Once he told (me) that when the
     delegation of the tribe of 'Abdul Qais came to the
     Prophet, the Prophet asked them, "Who are the
     people (i.e. you)? (Or) who are the delegate?"
     They replied, "We are from the tribe of Rabi'a."
     Then the Prophet said to them, "Welcome! O
     people (or O delegation of 'Abdul Qais)! Neither
     will you have disgrace nor will you regret." They
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! We cannot come to
     you except in the sacred month and there is the
     infidel tribe of Mudar intervening between you
     and us. So please order us to do something good
     (religious deeds) so that we may inform our
     people whom we have left behind (at home), and
     that we may enter Paradise (by acting on them)."
     Then they asked about drinks (what is legal and
     what is illegal). The Prophet ordered them to do
     four things and forbade them from four things. He
     ordered them to believe in Allah Alone and
     asked them, "Do you know what is meant by
     believing in Allah Alone?" They replied, "Allah
     and His Apostle know better." Thereupon the
     Prophet said, "It means: 

     1. To testify that none has the right to be
     worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is Allah's
     Apostle. 

     2. To offer prayers perfectly 

     3. To pay the Zakat (obligatory charity) 

     4. To observe fast during the month of Ramadan.

     5. And to pay Al-Khumus (one fifth of the booty
     to be given in Allah's Cause). 

     Then he forbade them four things, namely,
     Hantam, Dubba,' Naqir Ann Muzaffat or
     Muqaiyar; (These were the names of pots in
     which Alcoholic drinks were prepared) (The
     Prophet mentioned the container of wine and he
     meant the wine itself). The Prophet further said
     (to them): "Memorize them (these instructions)
     and convey them to the people whom you have
     left behind." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 51: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The reward of deeds
     depends upon the intention and every person will
     get the reward according to what he has
     intended. So whoever emigrated for Allah and
     His Apostle, then his emigration was for Allah
     and His Apostle. And whoever emigrated for
     worldly benefits or for a woman to marry, his
     emigration was for what he emigrated for." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 52: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet said, "If a man spends on his family
     (with the intention of having a reward from Allah)
     sincerely for Allah's sake then it is a (kind of)
     alms-giving in reward for him. 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 53: 

     Narrated Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "You will be rewarded for
     whatever you spend for Allah's sake even if it
     were a morsel which you put in your wife's
     mouth." 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 54: 

     Narrated Jarir bin Abdullah: 

     I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle
     for the following: 

     1. offer prayers perfectly 

     2. pay the Zakat (obligatory charity) 

     3. and be sincere and true to every Muslim. 


Volume 1, Book 2, Number 55: 

     Narrated Ziyad bin'Ilaqa: 

     I heard Jarir bin 'Abdullah (Praising Allah). On
     the day when Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba died, he
     (Jarir) got up (on the pulpit) and thanked and
     praised Allah and said, "Be afraid of Allah alone
     Who has none along with Him to be
     worshipped.(You should) be calm and quiet till
     the (new) chief comes to you and he will come to
     you soon. Ask Allah's forgiveness for your (late)
     chief because he himself loved to forgive others."
     Jarir added, "Amma badu (now then), I went to
     the Prophet and said, 'I give my pledge of
     allegiance to you for Islam." The Prophet
     conditioned (my pledge) for me to be sincere and
     true to every Muslim so I gave my pledge to him
     for this. By the Lord of this mosque! I am sincere
     and true to you (Muslims). Then Jarir asked for
     Allah's forgiveness and came down (from the
     pulpit). 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 3: 

              Knowledge 



Volume 1, Book 3, Number 56: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     While the Prophet was saying something in a
     gathering, a Bedouin came and asked him,
     "When would the Hour (Doomsday) take
     place?" Allah's Apostle continued his talk, so
     some people said that Allah's Apostle had heard
     the question, but did not like what that Bedouin
     had asked. Some of them said that Alllah's
     Apostle had not heard it. When the Prophet
     finished his speech, he said, "Where is the
     questioner, who enquired about the Hour
     (Doomsday)?" The Bedouin said, "I am here, O
     Allah's Apostle ." Then the Prophet said, "When
     honesty is lost, then wait for the Hour
     (Doomsday)." The Bedouin said, "How will that
     be lost?" The Prophet said, "When the power or
     authority comes in the hands of unfit persons,
     then wait for the Hour (Doomsday.)" 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 57: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     Once the Prophet remained behind us in a
     journey. He joined us while we were performing
     ablution for the prayer which was over-due. We
     were just passing wet hands over our feet (and
     not washing them properly) so the Prophet
     addressed us in a loud voice and said twice or
     thrice: "Save your heels from the fire." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 58: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Amongst the trees, there is
     a tree, the leaves of which do not fall and is like a
     Muslim. Tell me the name of that tree."
     Everybody started thinking about the trees of the
     desert areas. And I thought of the date-palm tree
     but felt shy to answer the others then asked,
     "What is that tree, O Allah's Apostle ?" He
     replied, "It is the date-palm tree." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 59: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "Amongst the trees, there is a
     tree, the leaves of which do not fall and is like a
     Muslim. Tell me the name of that tree."
     Everybody started thinking about the trees of the
     desert areas. And I thought of the date-palm
     tree. The others then asked, "Please inform us
     what is that tree, O Allah's Apostle?" He replied,
     "It is the date-palm tree." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 60: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     same as above Hadith 59. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 61: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     same as above Hadith 59. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 62: 

     Narrated Ibn Umar: 

     same as above Hadith 59. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 63: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     While we were sitting with the Prophet in the
     mosque, a man came riding on a camel. He made
     his camel kneel down in the mosque, tied its
     foreleg and then said: "Who amongst you is
     Muhammad?" At that time the Prophet was
     sitting amongst us (his companions) leaning on his
     arm. We replied, "This white man reclining on his
     arm." The an then addressed him, "O Son of
     'Abdul Muttalib." 

     The Prophet said, "I am here to answer your
     questions." The man said to the Prophet, "I want
     to ask you something and will be hard in
     questioning. So do not get angry." The Prophet
     said, "Ask whatever you want." The man said, "I
     ask you by your Lord, and the Lord of those
     who were before you, has Allah sent you as an
     Apostle to all the mankind?" The Prophet
     replied, "By Allah, yes." The man further said, "I
     ask you by Allah. Has Allah ordered you to offer
     five prayers in a day and night (24 hours).? He
     replied, "By Allah, Yes." The man further said, "I
     ask you by Allah! Has Allah ordered you to
     observe fasts during this month of the year (i.e.
     Ramadan)?" He replied, "By Allah, Yes." The
     man further said, "I ask you by Allah. Has Allah
     ordered you to take Zakat (obligatory charity)
     from our rich people and distribute it amongst
     our poor people?" The Prophet replied, "By
     Allah, yes." Thereupon that man said, "I have
     believed in all that with which you have been
     sent, and I have been sent by my people as a
     messenger, and I am Dimam bin Tha'laba from
     the brothers of Bani Sa'd bin Bakr." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 64: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas: 

     Once Allah's Apostle gave a letter to a person
     and ordered him to go and deliver it to the
     Governor of Bahrain. (He did so) and the
     Governor of Bahrain sent it to Chousroes, who
     read that letter and then tore it to pieces. (The
     sub-narrator (Ibn Shihab) thinks that Ibn
     Al-Musaiyab said that Allah's Apostle invoked
     Allah against them (saying), "May Allah tear them
     into pieces, and disperse them all totally.)" 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 65: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once the Prophet wrote a letter or had an idea
     of writing a letter. The Prophet was told that they
     (rulers) would not read letters unless they were
     sealed. So the Prophet got a silver ring made
     with "Muhammad Allah's Apostle" engraved on
     it. As if I were just observing its white glitter in
     the hand of the Prophet 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 66: 

     Narrated Abu Waqid Al-Laithi: 

     While Allah's Apostle was sitting in the mosque
     with some people, three men came. Two of them
     came in front of Allah's Apostle and the third one
     went away. The two persons kept on standing
     before Allah's Apostle for a while and then one
     of them found a place in the circle and sat there
     while the other sat behind the gathering, and the
     third one went away. When Allah's Apostle
     finished his preaching, he said, "Shall I tell you
     about these three persons? One of them be-took
     himself to Allah, so Allah took him into His grace
     and mercy and accommodated him, the second
     felt shy from Allah, so Allah sheltered Him in His
     mercy (and did not punish him), while the third
     turned his face from Allah and went away, so
     Allah turned His face from him likewise. " 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 67: 

     Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Bakra's father:

     Once the Prophet was riding his camel and a
     man was holding its rein. The Prophet asked,
     "What is the day today?" We kept quiet, thinking
     that he might give that day another name. He
     said, "Isn't it the day of Nahr (slaughtering of the
     animals of sacrifice)" We replied, "Yes." He
     further asked, "Which month is this?" We again
     kept quiet, thinking that he might give it another
     name. Then he said, "Isn't it the month of
     Dhul-Hijja?" We replied, "Yes." He said, "Verily!
     Your blood, property and honor are sacred to
     one another (i.e. Muslims) like the sanctity of this
     day of yours, in this month of yours and in this
     city of yours. It is incumbent upon those who are
     present to inform those who are absent because
     those who are absent might comprehend (what I
     have said) better than the present audience." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 68: 

     Narrated Ibn Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet used to take care of us in preaching
     by selecting a suitable time, so that we might not
     get bored. (He abstained from pestering us with
     sermons and knowledge all the time). 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 69: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Facilitate things to people
     (concerning religious matters), and do not make
     it hard for them and give them good tidings and
     do not make them run away (from Islam)." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 70: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     'Abdullah used to give a religious talk to the
     people on every Thursday. Once a man said, "O
     Aba 'Abdur-Rahman! (By Allah) I wish if you
     could preach us daily." He replied, "The only
     thing which prevents me from doing so, is that I
     hate to bore you, and no doubt I take care of
     you in preaching by selecting a suitable time just
     as the Prophet used to do with us, for fear of
     making us bored." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 71: 

     Narrated Muawiya: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "If Allah wants to
     do good to a person, He makes him comprehend
     the religion. I am just a distributor, but the grant
     is from Allah. (And remember) that this nation
     (true Muslims) will keep on following Allah's
     teachings strictly and they will not be harmed by
     any one going on a different path till Allah's order
     (Day of Judgment) is established." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 72: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     We were with the Prophet and a spadix of
     date-palm tree was brought to him. On that he
     said, "Amongst the trees, there is a tree which
     resembles a Muslim." I wanted to say that it was
     the date-palm tree but as I was the youngest of
     all (of them) I kept quiet. And then the Prophet
     said, "It is the date-palm tree." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 73: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet said, "Do not wish to be like anyone
     except in two cases. (The first is) A person,
     whom Allah has given wealth and he spends it
     righteously; (the second is) the one whom Allah
     has given wisdom (the Holy Qur'an) and he acts
     according to it and teaches it to others."
     (Fateh-al-Bari page 177 Vol. 1) 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 74: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     That he differed with Hur bin Qais bin Hisn
     Al-Fazari regarding the companion of (the
     Prophet) Moses. Ibn 'Abbas said that he was
     Khadir. Meanwhile, Ubai bin Ka'b passed by
     them and Ibn 'Abbas called him, saying "My
     friend (Hur) and I have differed regarding Moses'
     companion whom Moses, asked the way to
     meet. Have you heard the Prophet mentioning
     something about him? He said, "Yes. I heard
     Allah's Apostle saying, "While Moses was sitting
     in the company of some Israelites, a man came
     and asked him. "Do you know anyone who is
     more learned than you? Moses replied: "No." So
     Allah sent the Divine Inspiration to Moses: 'Yes,
     Our slave Khadir (is more learned than you.)'
     Moses asked (Allah) how to meet him (Khadir).
     So Allah made the fish as a sign for him and he
     was told that when the fish was lost, he should
     return (to the place where he had lost it) and
     there he would meet him (Al-Khadir). So Moses
     went on looking for the sign of the fish in the sea.
     The servant-boy of Moses said to him: Do you
     remember when we betook ourselves to the
     rock, I indeed forgot the fish, none but Satan
     made me forget to remember it. On that Moses
     said: 'That is what we have been seeking?
     (18.64) So they went back retracing their
     foot-steps, and found Khadir. (And) what
     happened further to them is narrated in the Holy
     Qur'an by Allah. (18.54 up to 18.82) 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 75: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once the Prophet embraced me and said, "O
     Allah! Bestow on him the knowledge of the
     Book (Qur'an)." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 76: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once I came riding a she-ass and had (just)
     attained the age of puberty. Allah's Apostle was
     offering the prayer at Mina. There was no wall in
     front of him and I passed in front of some of the
     row while they were offering their prayers. There
     I let the she-ass loose to graze and entered the
     row, and nobody objected to it. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 77: 

     Narrated Mahmud bin Rabi'a: 

     When I was a boy of five, I remember, the
     Prophet took water from a bucket (used far
     getting water out of a well) with his mouth and
     threw it on my face. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 78: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     that he differed with Hur bin Qais bin Hisn
     Al-Fazari regarding the companion of the
     Prophet Moses. Meanwhile, Ubai bin Ka'b
     passed by them and Ibn 'Abbas called him
     saying, "My friend (Hur) and I have differed
     regarding Moses' companion whom Moses
     asked the way to meet. Have you heard Allah's
     Apostle mentioning something about him? Ubai
     bin Ka'b said: "Yes, I heard the Prophet
     mentioning something about him (saying) while
     Moses was sitting in the company of some
     Israelites, a man came and asked him: "Do you
     know anyone who is more learned than you?
     Moses replied: "No." So Allah sent the Divine
     Inspiration to Moses: '--Yes, Our slave Khadir is
     more learned than you. Moses asked Allah how
     to meet him (Al-Khadir). So Allah made the fish
     a sign for him and he was told when the fish was
     lost, he should return (to the place where he had
     lost it) and there he would meet him (Al-Khadir).
     So Moses went on looking for the sign of the fish
     in the sea. The servant-boy of Moses said: 'Do
     you remember when we betook ourselves to the
     rock, I indeed forgot the fish, none but Satan
     made me forget to remember it. On that Moses
     said, 'That is what we have been seeking.' So
     they went back retracing their footsteps, and
     found Kha,dir. (and) what happened further
     about them is narrated in the Holy Qur'an by
     Allah." (18.54 up to 18.82) 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 79: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "The example of guidance and
     knowledge with which Allah has sent me is like
     abundant rain falling on the earth, some of which
     was fertile soil that absorbed rain water and
     brought forth vegetation and grass in abundance.
     (And) another portion of it was hard and held the
     rain water and Allah benefited the people with it
     and they utilized it for drinking, making their
     animals drink from it and for irrigation of the land
     for cultivation. (And) a portion of it was barren
     which could neither hold the water nor bring forth
     vegetation (then that land gave no benefits). The
     first is the example of the person who
     comprehends Allah's religion and gets benefit
     (from the knowledge) which Allah has revealed
     through me (the Prophets and learns and then
     teaches others. The last example is that of a
     person who does not care for it and does not
     take Allah's guidance revealed through me (He is
     like that barren land.)" 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 80: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "From among the portents
     of the Hour are (the following): 

     1. Religious knowledge will be taken away (by
     the death of Religious learned men). 

     2. (Religious) ignorance will prevail. 

     3. Drinking of Alcoholic drinks (will be very
     common). 

     4. There will be prevalence of open illegal sexual
     intercourse. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 81: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I will narrate to you a Hadith and none other than
     I will tell you about after it. I heard Allah's
     Apostle saying: From among the portents of the
     Hour are (the following): 

     1. Religious knowledge will decrease (by the
     death of religious learned men). 

     2. Religious ignorance will prevail. 

     3. There will be prevalence of open illegal sexual
     intercourse. 

     4. Women will increase in number and men will
     decrease in number so much so that fifty women
     will be looked after by one man. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 82: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "While I was sleeping, I
     saw that a cup full of milk was brought to me and
     I drank my fill till I noticed (the milk) its wetness
     coming out of my nails. Then I gave the remaining
     milk to 'Umar Ibn Al-Khattab" The companions
     of the Prophet asked, "What have you
     interpreted (about this dream)? "O Allah's
     Apostle ,!" he replied, "(It is religious)
     knowledge." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 83: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Amr bin Al 'Aas: 

     Allah's Apostle stopped (for a while near the
     Jimar) at Mina during his last Hajj for the people
     and they were asking him questions. A man came
     and said, "I forgot and got my head shaved
     before slaughtering the Hadi (sacrificing animal)."
     The Prophet said, "There is no harm, go and do
     the slaughtering now." Then another person came
     and said, "I forgot and slaughtered (the camel)
     before Rami (throwing of the pebbles) at the
     Jamra." The Prophet said, "Do the Rami now
     and there is no harm." 

     The narrator added: So on that day, when the
     Prophet was asked about anything (as regards
     the ceremonies of Hajj) performed before or
     after its due time, his reply was: "Do it (now) and
     there is no harm." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 84: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Somebody said to the Prophet (during his last
     Hajj), "I did the slaughtering before doing the
     Rami.' The Prophet beckoned with his hand and
     said, "There is no harm in that." Then another
     person said. "I got my head shaved before
     offering the sacrifice." The Prophet beckoned
     with his hand saying, "There is no harm in that." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 85: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "(Religious) knowledge will be
     taken away (by the death of religious scholars)
     ignorance (in religion) and afflictions will appear;
     and Harj will increase." It was asked, "What is
     Harj, O Allah's Apostle?" He replied by
     beckoning with his hand indicating "killing."
     (Fateh-al-Bari Page 192, Vol. 1) 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 86: 

     Narrated Asma: 

     I came to 'Aisha while she was praying, and said
     to her, "What has happened to the people?" She
     pointed out towards the sky. (I looked towards
     the mosque), and saw the people offering the
     prayer. Aisha said, "Subhan Allah." I said to her,
     "Is there a sign?" She nodded with her head
     meaning, "Yes." I, too, then stood (for the prayer
     of eclipse) till I became (nearly) unconscious and
     later on I poured water on my head. After the
     prayer, the Prophet praised and glorified Allah
     and then said, 

     "Just now at this place I have seen what I have
     never seen before, including Paradise and Hell.
     No doubt it has been inspired to me that you will
     be put to trials in your graves and these trials will
     be like the trials of Masiah-ad-Dajjal or nearly
     like it (the sub narrator is not sure which
     expression Asma' used). You will be asked,
     'What do you know about this man (the Prophet
     Muhammad)?' Then the faithful believer (or
     Asma' said a similar word) will reply, 'He is
     Muhammad Allah's Apostle who had come to us
     with clear evidences and guidance and so we
     accepted his teachings and followed him. And he
     is Muhammad.' And he will repeat it thrice. Then
     the angels will say to him, 'Sleep in peace as we
     have come to know that you were a faithful
     believer.' On the other hand, a hypocrite or a
     doubtful person will reply, 'I do not know, but I
     heard the people saying something and so I said
     it.' (the same). " 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 87: 

     Narrated Abu Jamra: 

     I was an interpreter between the people and Ibn
     'Abbas. Once Ibn 'Abbas said that a delegation
     of the tribe of'Abdul Qais came to the Prophet
     who asked them, "Who are the people (i.e.
     you)? (Or) who are the delegates?" They replied,
     "We are from the tribe of Rabi'a." Then the
     Prophet said to them, "Welcome, O people (or
     said, "O delegation (of 'Abdul Qais).") Neither
     will you have disgrace nor will you regret." They
     said, "We have come to you from a distant place
     and there is the tribe of the infidels of Mudar
     intervening between you and us and we cannot
     come to you except in the sacred month. So
     please order us to do something good (religious
     deeds) and that we may also inform our people
     whom we have left behind (at home) and that we
     may enter Paradise (by acting on them.)" The
     Prophet ordered them to do four things, and
     forbade them from four things. He ordered them
     to believe in Allah Alone, the Honorable the
     Majestic and said to them, "Do you know what
     is meant by believing in Allah Alone?" They
     replied, "Allah and His Apostle know better."
     Thereupon the Prophet said, "(That means to
     testify that none has the right to be worshipped
     but Allah and that Muhammad is His Apostle, to
     offer prayers perfectly, to pay Zakat, to observe
     fasts during the month of Ramadan, (and) to pay
     Al-Khumus (one fifth of the booty to be given in
     Allah's cause)." Then he forbade them four
     things, namely Ad-Dubba.' Hantam, Muzaffat
     (and) An-Naqir or Muqaiyar(These were the
     names of pots in which alcoholic drinks used to
     be prepared). The Prophet further said,
     "Memorize them (these instructions) and tell them
     to the people whom you have left behind." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 88: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Mulaika: 

     'Uqba bin Al-Harith said that he had married the
     daughter of Abi Ihab bin 'Aziz. Later on a
     woman came to him and said, "I have suckled
     (nursed) Uqba and the woman whom he married
     (his wife) at my breast." 'Uqba said to her,
     "Neither I knew that you have suckled (nursed)
     me nor did you tell me." Then he rode over to
     see Allah's Apostle at Medina, and asked him
     about it. Allah's Apostle said, "How can you
     keep her as a wife when it has been said (that
     she is your foster-sister)?" Then Uqba divorced
     her, and she married another man. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 89: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     My Ansari neighbor from Bani Umaiya bin Zaid
     who used to live at 'Awali Al-Medina and used
     to visit the Prophet by turns. He used to go one
     day and I another day. When I went I used to
     bring the news of that day regarding the Divine
     Inspiration and other things, and when he went,
     he used to do the same for me. Once my Ansari
     friend, in his turn (on returning from the Prophet),
     knocked violently at my door and asked if I was
     there." I became horrified and came out to him.
     He said, "Today a great thing has happened." I
     then went to Hafsa and saw her weeping. I
     asked her, "Did Allah's Apostle divorce you all?"
     She replied, "I do not know." Then, I entered
     upon the Prophet and said while standing, "Have
     you divorced your wives?" The Prophet replied
     in the negative. On what I said, "Allahu-Akbar
     (Allah is Greater)." (See Hadith No. 119, Vol. 3
     for details) 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 90: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari: 

     Once a man said to Allah's Apostle "O Allah's
     Apostle! I may not attend the (compulsory
     congregational) prayer because so and so (the
     Imam) prolongs the prayer when he leads us for
     it. The narrator added: "I never saw the Prophet
     more furious in giving advice than he was on that
     day. The Prophet said, "O people! Some of you
     make others dislike good deeds (the prayers).
     So whoever leads the people in prayer should
     shorten it because among them there are the sick
     the weak and the needy (having some jobs to
     do)." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 91: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani: 

     A man asked the Prophet about the picking up of
     a "Luqata" (fallen lost thing). The Prophet
     replied, "Recognize and remember its tying
     material and its container, and make public
     announcement (about it) for one year, then utilize
     it but give it to its owner if he comes." Then the
     person asked about the lost camel. On that, the
     Prophet got angry and his cheeks or his Face
     became red and he said, "You have no concern
     with it as it has its water container, and its feet
     and it will reach water, and eat (the leaves) of
     trees till its owner finds it." The man then asked
     about the lost sheep. The Prophet replied, "It is
     either for you, for your brother (another person)
     or for the wolf." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 92: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet was asked about things which he
     did not like, but when the questioners insisted,
     the Prophet got angry. He then said to the
     people, "Ask me anything you like." A man
     asked, "Who is my father?" The Prophet replied,
     "Your father is Hudhafa." Then another man got
     up and said, "Who is my father, O Allah's
     Apostle ?" He replied, "Your father is Salim,
     Maula (the freed slave) of Shaiba." So when
     'Umar saw that (the anger) on the face of the
     Prophet he said, "O Allah's Apostle! We repent
     to Allah (Our offending you)." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 93: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     One day Allah's Apostle came out (before the
     people) and 'Abdullah bin Hudhafa stood up and
     asked (him) "Who is my father?" The Prophet
     replied, "Your father is Hudhafa." The Prophet
     told them repeatedly (in anger) to ask him
     anything they liked. 'Umar knelt down before the
     Prophet and said thrice, "We accept Allah as
     (our) Lord and Islam as (our) religion and
     Muhammad as (our) Prophet." After that the
     Prophet became silent. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 94: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Whenever the Prophet asked permission to
     enter, he knocked the door thrice with greeting
     and whenever he spoke a sentence (said a thing)
     he used to repeat it thrice. (See Hadith No. 261,
     Vol. 8). 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 95: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Whenever the Prophet spoke a sentence (said a
     thing), he used to repeat it thrice so that the
     people could understand it properly from him
     and whenever he asked permission to enter, (he
     knocked the door) thrice with greeting. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 96: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     Once Allah's Apostle remained behind us in a
     journey. He joined us while we were performing
     ablution for the 'Asr prayer which was over-due.
     We were just passing wet hands over our feet
     (not washing them properly) so the Prophet
     addressed us in a loud voice and said twice or
     thrice, "Save your heels from the fire." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 97: 

     Narrated Abu Burda's father: 

     Allah's Apostle said "Three persons will have a
     double reward: 

     1. A Person from the people of the scriptures
     who believed in his prophet (Jesus or Moses)
     and then believed in the Prophet Muhammad (i
     .e. has embraced Islam). 

     2. A slave who discharges his duties to Allah and
     his master. 

     3. A master of a woman-slave who teaches her
     good manners and educates her in the best
     possible way (the religion) and manumits her and
     then marries her." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 97g: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once Allah's Apostle came out while Bilal was
     accompanying him. He went towards the women
     thinking that they had not heard him (i.e. his
     sermon). So he preached them and ordered them
     to pay alms. (Hearing that) the women started
     giving alms; some donated their ear-rings, some
     gave their rings and Bilal was collecting them in
     the corner of his garment. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 98: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I said: "O Allah's Apostle! Who will be the
     luckiest person, who will gain your intercession
     on the Day of Resurrection?" Allah's Apostle
     said: O Abu Huraira! "I have thought that none
     will ask me about it before you as I know your
     longing for the (learning of) Hadiths. The luckiest
     person who will have my intercession on the Day
     of Resurrection will be the one who said
     sincerely from the bottom of his heart "None has
     the right to be worshipped but Allah." 

     And 'Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz wrote to Abu Bakr
     bin Hazm, "Look for the knowledge of Hadith
     and get it written, as I am afraid that religious
     knowledge will vanish and the religious learned
     men will pass away (die). Do not accept anything
     save the Hadiths of the Prophet. Circulate
     knowledge and teach the ignorant, for
     knowledge does not vanish except when it is
     kept secretly (to oneself)." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 99: 

     Narrated Abdullah Ibn Dinar: 

     also narrates the same (above-mentioned
     statement) as has been narrated by 'Umar bin
     'Abdul 'Aziz up to "The religious scholar (learned
     men) will pass away (die)." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 100: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al' As: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "Allah does not
     take away the knowledge, by taking it away from
     (the hearts of) the people, but takes it away by
     the death of the religious learned men till when
     none of the (religious learned men) remains,
     people will take as their leaders ignorant persons
     who when consulted will give their verdict
     without knowledge. So they will go astray and
     will lead the people astray." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 101: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Some women requested the Prophet to fix a day
     for them as the men were taking all his time. On
     that he promised them one day for religious
     lessons and commandments. Once during such a
     lesson the Prophet said, "A woman whose three
     children die will be shielded by them from the
     Hell fire." On that a woman asked, "If only two
     die?" He replied, "Even two (will shield her from
     the Hell-fire)." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 102: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     as above (the sub narrators are different). Abu
     Huraira qualified the three children referred to in
     the above mentioned Hadith as not having
     reached the age of committing sins (i.e. age of
     puberty) . 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 103: 

     Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika: 

     Whenever 'Aisha (the wife of the Prophet) heard
     anything which she did not understand, she used
     to ask again till she understood it completely.
     Aisha said: "Once the Prophet said, "Whoever
     will be called to account (about his deeds on the
     Day of Resurrection) will surely be punished." I
     said, "Doesn't Allah say: "He surely will receive
     an easy reckoning." (84.8) The Prophet replied,
     "This means only the presentation of the accounts
     but whoever will be argued about his account,
     will certainly be ruined." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 104: 

     Narrated Said: 

     Abu Shuraih said, "When 'Amr bin Said was
     sending the troops to Mecca (to fight 'Abdullah
     bin Az-Zubair) I said to him, 'O chief! Allow me
     to tell you what the Prophet said on the day
     following the conquests of Mecca. My ears
     heard and my heart comprehended, and I saw
     him with my own eyes, when he said it. He
     glorified and praised Allah and then said, "Allah
     and not the people has made Mecca a sanctuary.
     So anybody who has belief in Allah and the Last
     Day (i.e. a Muslim) should neither shed blood in
     it nor cut down its trees. If anybody argues that
     fighting is allowed in Mecca as Allah's Apostle
     did fight (in Mecca), tell him that Allah gave
     permission to His Apostle, but He did not give it
     to you. The Prophet added: Allah allowed me
     only for a few hours on that day (of the
     conquest) and today (now) its sanctity is the
     same (valid) as it was before. So it is incumbent
     upon those who are present to convey it (this
     information) to those who are absent." Abu-
     Shuraih was asked, "What did 'Amr reply?" He
     said 'Amr said, "O Abu Shuraih! I know better
     than you (in this respect). Mecca does not give
     protection to one who disobeys (Allah) or runs
     after committing murder, or theft (and takes
     refuge in Mecca). 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 105: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     The Prophet said. No doubt your blood,
     property, the sub-narrator Muhammad thought
     that Abu Bakra had also mentioned and your
     honor (chastity), are sacred to one another as is
     the sanctity of this day of yours in this month of
     yours. It is incumbent on those who are present
     to inform those who are absent." (Muhammad
     the Subnarrator used to say, "Allah's Apostle
     told the truth.") The Prophet repeated twice: "No
     doubt! Haven't I conveyed Allah's message to
     you. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 106: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     The Prophet said, "Do not tell a lie against me for
     whoever tells a lie against me (intentionally) then
     he will surely enter the Hell-fire." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 107: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair: 

     I said to my father, 'I do not hear from you any
     narration (Hadith) of Allah s Apostle as I hear
     (his narrations) from so and so?" Az-Zubair
     replied. l was always with him (the Prophet) and
     I heard him saying "Whoever tells a lie against me
     (intentionally) then (surely) let him occupy, his
     seat in Hell-fire. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 108: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The fact which stops me from narrating a great
     number of Hadiths to you is that the Prophet
     said: "Whoever tells a lie against me intentionally,
     then (surely) let him occupy his seat in Hell-fire." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 109: 

     Narrated Salama: 

     I heard the Prophet saying, "Whoever
     (intentionally) ascribes to me what I have not said
     then (surely) let him occupy his seat in Hell-fire." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 110: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Name yourselves with my
     name (use my name) but do not name yourselves
     with my Kunya name (i.e. Abu-l Qasim). And
     whoever sees me in a dream then surely he has
     seen me for Satan cannot impersonate me. And
     whoever tells a lie against me (intentionally), then
     (surely) let him occupy his seat in Hell-fire." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 111: 

     Narrated Ash-Sha'bi: 

     Abu Juhaifa said, "I asked Ali, 'Have you got any
     book (which has been revealed to the Prophet
     apart from the Qur'an)?' 'Ali replied, 'No, except
     Allah's Book or the power of understanding
     which has been bestowed (by Allah) upon a
     Muslim or what is (written) in this sheet of paper
     (with me).' Abu Juhaifa said, "I asked, 'What is
     (written) in this sheet of paper?' Ali replied, it
     deals with The Diyya (compensation (blood
     money) paid by the killer to the relatives of the
     victim), the ransom for the releasing of the
     captives from the hands of the enemies, and the
     law that no Muslim should be killed in Qisas
     (equality in punishment) for the killing of (a
     disbeliever). 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 112: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     In the year of the Conquest of Mecca, the tribe
     of Khuza'a killed a man from the tribe of Bani
     Laith in revenge for a killed person, belonging to
     them. They informed the Prophet about it. So he
     rode his Rahila (she-camel for riding) and
     addressed the people saying, "Allah held back
     the killing from Mecca. (The sub-narrator is in
     doubt whether the Prophet said "elephant or
     killing," as the Arabic words standing for these
     words have great similarity in shape), but He
     (Allah) let His Apostle and the believers over
     power the infidels of Mecca. Beware! (Mecca is
     a sanctuary) Verily! Fighting in Mecca was not
     permitted for anyone before me nor will it be
     permitted for anyone after me. It (war) in it was
     made legal for me for few hours or so on that
     day. No doubt it is at this moment a sanctuary, it
     is not allowed to uproot its thorny shrubs or to
     uproot its trees or to pick up its Luqatt (fallen
     things) except by a person who will look for its
     owner (announce it publicly). And if somebody is
     killed, then his closest relative has the right to
     choose one of the two-- the blood money
     (Diyya) or retaliation having the killer killed. In
     the meantime a man from Yemen came and said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! Get that written for me." The
     Prophet ordered his companions to write that for
     him. Then a man from Quraish said, "Except
     Al-Iqhkhir (a type of grass that has good smell)
     O Allah's Apostle, as we use it in our houses and
     graves." The Prophet said, "Except Al-Idhkhiri.e.
     Al-Idhkhir is allowed to be plucked." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 113: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     There is none among the companions of the
     Prophet who has narrated more Hadiths than I
     except 'Abdallah bin Amr (bin Al-'As) who used
     to write them and I never did the same. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 114: 

     Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah: 

     Ibn 'Abbas said, "When the ailment of the
     Prophet became worse, he said, 'Bring for me
     (writing) paper and I will write for you a
     statement after which you will not go astray.' But
     'Umar said, 'The Prophet is seriously ill, and we
     have got Allah's Book with us and that is
     sufficient for us.' But the companions of the
     Prophet differed about this and there was a hue
     and cry. On that the Prophet said to them, 'Go
     away (and leave me alone). It is not right that you
     should quarrel in front of me." Ibn 'Abbas came
     out saying, "It was most unfortunate (a great
     disaster) that Allah's Apostle was prevented from
     writing that statement for them because of their
     disagreement and noise. (Note: It is apparent
     from this Hadith that Ibn 'Abbes had witnessed
     the event and came out saying this statement. The
     truth is not so, for Ibn 'Abbas used to say this
     statement on narrating the Hadith and he had not
     witnessed the event personally. See Fath Al-Bari
     Vol. 1, p.220 footnote.) (See Hadith No. 228,
     Vol. 4). 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 115: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     One night Allah's Apostle got up and said,
     "Subhan Allah! How many afflictions have been
     descended tonight and how many treasures have
     been disclosed! Go and wake the sleeping lady
     occupants of these dwellings (his wives) up (for
     prayers). A well-dressed (soul) in this world may
     be naked in the Hereafter. " 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 116: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Once the Prophet led us in the 'Isha' prayer
     during the last days of his life and after finishing it
     (the prayer) (with Taslim) he said: "Do you
     realize (the importance of) this night?" Nobody
     present on the surface of the earth tonight will be
     living after the completion of one hundred years
     from this night." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 117: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     I stayed overnight in the house of my aunt
     Maimuna bint Al-Harith (the wife of the Prophet
     ) while the Prophet was there with her during her
     night turn. The Prophet offered the 'Isha' prayer
     (in the mosque), returned home and after having
     prayed four Rakat, he slept. Later on he got up
     at night and then asked whether the boy (or he
     used a similar word) had slept? Then he got up
     for the prayer and I stood up by his left side but
     he made me stand to his right and offered five
     Rakat followed by two more Rakat. Then he
     slept and I heard him snoring and then (after a
     while) he left for the (Fajr) prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 118: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     People say that I have narrated many Hadiths
     (The Prophet's narrations). Had it not been for
     two verses in the Qur'an, I would not have
     narrated a single Hadith, and the verses are: 

     "Verily those who conceal the clear sign and the
     guidance which We have sent down . . . (up to)
     Most Merciful." (2:159-160). And no doubt our
     Muhajir (emigrant) brothers used to be busy in
     the market with their business (bargains) and our
     Ansari brothers used to be busy with their
     property (agriculture). But I (Abu Huraira) used
     to stick to Allah's Apostle contented with what
     will fill my stomach and I used to attend that
     which they used not to attend and I used to
     memorize that which they used not to memorize. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 119: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I said to Allah's Apostle "I hear many narrations
     (Hadiths) from you but I forget them." Allah's
     Apostle said, "Spread your Rida' (garment)." I
     did accordingly and then he moved his hands as
     if filling them with something (and emptied them
     in my Rida') and then said, "Take and wrap this
     sheet over your body." I did it and after that I
     never forgot any thing. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 120: 

     Narrated Ibrahim bin Al-Mundhir: 

     Ibn Abi Fudaik narrated the same as above
     (Hadith...119) but added that the Prophet had
     moved his hands as if filling them with something
     and then he emptied them in the Rida' of Abu
     Huraira. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 121: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I have memorized two kinds of knowledge from
     Allah's Apostle . I have propagated one of them
     to you and if I propagated the second, then my
     pharynx (throat) would be cut (i.e. killed). 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 122: 

     Narrated Jarir: 

     The Prophet said to me during Hajjat-al-Wida':
     Let the people keep quiet and listen. Then he
     said (addressing the people), "Do not (become
     infidels) revert to disbelief after me by striking the
     necks (cutting the throats) of one another (killing
     each other)." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 123: 

     Narrated Said bin Jubair: 

     I said to Ibn 'Abbas, "Nauf-Al-Bakali claims that
     Moses (the companion of Khadir) was not the
     Moses of Bani Israel but he was another
     Moses." Ibn 'Abbas remarked that the enemy of
     Allah (Nauf) was a liar. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 124: 

     Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b: 

     The Prophet said, "Once the Prophet Moses
     stood up and addressed Bani Israel. He was
     asked, "Who is the most learned man amongst
     the people. He said, "I am the most learned."
     Allah admonished Moses as he did not attribute
     absolute knowledge to Him (Allah). So Allah
     inspired to him "At the junction of the two seas
     there is a slave amongst my slaves who is more
     learned than you." Moses said, "O my Lord!
     How can I meet him?" Allah said: Take a fish in a
     large basket (and proceed) and you will find him
     at the place where you will lose the fish. So
     Moses set out along with his (servant) boy,
     Yusha' bin Nuin and carried a fish in a large
     basket till they reached a rock, where they laid
     their heads (i.e. lay down) and slept. The fish
     came out of the basket and it took its way into
     the sea as in a tunnel. So it was an amazing thing
     for both Moses and his (servant) boy. They
     proceeded for the rest of that night and the
     following day. When the day broke, Moses said
     to his (servant) boy: "Bring us our early meal. No
     doubt, we have suffered much fatigue in this
     journey." Moses did not get tired till he passed
     the place about which he was told. There the
     (servant) boy told Moses, "Do you remember
     when we betook ourselves to the rock, I indeed
     forgot the fish." Moses remarked, "That is what
     we have been seeking. So they went back
     retracing their foot-steps, till they reached the
     rock. There they saw a man covered with a
     garment (or covering himself with his own
     garment). Moses greeted him. Al-Khadir replied
     saying, "How do people greet each other in your
     land?" Moses said, "I am Moses." He asked,
     "The Moses of Bani Israel?" Moses replied in the
     affirmative and added, "May I follow you so that
     you teach me of that knowledge which you have
     been taught." Al-Khadir replied, "Verily! You
     will not be able to remain patient with me, O
     Moses! I have some of the knowledge of Allah
     which He has taught me and which you do not
     know, while you have some knowledge which
     Allah has taught you which I do not know."
     Moses said, "Allah willing, you will find me
     patient and I will not disobey you in aught. So
     both of them set out walking along the sea-shore,
     as they did not have a boat. In the meantime a
     boat passed by them and they requested the
     crew of the boat to take them on board. The
     crew recognized Al-Khadir and took them on
     board without fare. Then a sparrow came and
     stood on the edge of the boat and dipped its
     beak once or twice in the sea. Al-Khadir said:
     "O Moses! My knowledge and your knowledge
     have not decreased Allah's knowledge except as
     much as this sparrow has decreased the water of
     the sea with its beak." Al-Khadir went to one of
     the planks of the boat and plucked it out. Moses
     said, "These people gave us a free lift but you
     have broken their boat and scuttled it so as to
     drown its people." Al-Khadir replied, "Didn't I
     tell you that you will not be able to remain patient
     with me." Moses said, "Call me not to account
     for what I forgot." The first (excuse) of Moses
     was that he had forgotten. Then they proceeded
     further and found a boy playing with other boys.
     Al-Khadir took hold of the boy's head from the
     top and plucked it out with his hands (i.e. killed
     him). Moses said, "Have you killed an innocent
     soul who has killed none." Al-Kha,dir replied,
     "Did I not tell you that you cannot remain patient
     with me?" Then they both proceeded till when
     they came to the people of a town, they asked
     them for food, but they refused to entertain them.
     Then they found there a wall on the point of
     collapsing. Al-Khadir repaired it with his own
     hands. Moses said, "If you had wished, surely
     you could have taken wages for it." Al-Khadir
     replied, "This is the parting between you and
     me." The Prophet added, "May Allah be
     Merciful to Moses! Would that he could have
     been more patient to learn more about his story
     with Al-Khadir. " 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 125: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     A man came to the Prophet and asked, "O
     Allah's Apostle! What kind of fighting is in Allah's
     cause? (I ask this), for some of us fight because
     of being enraged and angry and some for the
     sake of his pride and haughtiness." The Prophet
     raised his head (as the questioner was standing)
     and said, "He who fights so that Allah's Word
     (Islam) should be superior, then he fights in
     Allah's cause." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 126: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amar: 

     I saw the Prophet near the Jamra and the people
     were asking him questions (about religious
     problems). A man asked, "O Allah's Apostle! I
     have slaughtered the Hadi (animal) before doing
     the Rami." The Prophet replied, "Do the Rami
     (now) and there is no harm." Another person
     asked, "O Allah's Apostle! I got my head shaved
     before slaughtering the animal." The Prophet
     replied, "Do the slaughtering (now) and there is
     no harm." So on that day, when the Prophet was
     asked about anything as regards the ceremonies
     of Hajj performed before or after its due time his
     reply was, "Do it (now) and there is no harm." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 127: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     While I was going with the Prophet through the
     ruins of Medina and he was reclining on a
     date-palm leaf stalk, some Jews passed by.
     Some of them said to the others: Ask him (the
     Prophet) about the spirit. Some of them said that
     they should not ask him that question as he might
     give a reply which would displease them. But
     some of them insisted on asking, and so one of
     them stood up and asked, "O Aba-l-Qasim !
     What is the spirit?" The Prophet remained quiet.
     I thought he was being inspired Divinely. So I
     stayed till that state of the Prophet (while being
     inspired) was over. The Prophet then said, "And
     they ask you (O Muhammad) concerning the
     spirit --Say: The spirit -- its knowledge is with
     my Lord. And of knowledge you (mankind) have
     been given only a little)." (17.85) 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 128: 

     Narrated Aswad: 

     Ibn Az-Zubair said to me, "Aisha used to tell you
     secretly a number of things. What did she tell you
     about the Ka'ba?" I replied, "She told me that
     once the Prophet said, 'O 'Aisha! Had not your
     people been still close to the pre-Islamic period
     of ignorance (infidelity)! I would have dismantled
     the Ka'ba and would have made two doors in it;
     one for entrance and the other for exit." Later on
     Ibn Az-Zubair did the same. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 129: 

     Narrated Abu At-Tufail: 

     the above mentioned Statement of 'Ali. 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 130: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     "Once Mu'adh was along with Allah's Apostle as
     a companion rider. Allah's Apostle said, "O
     Mu'adh bin Jabal." Mu'adh replied, "Labbaik and
     Sa'daik. O Allah's Apostle!" Again the Prophet
     said, "O Mu'adh!" Mu'adh said thrice, "Labbaik
     and Sa'daik, O Allah's Apostle!" Allah's Apostle
     said, "There is none who testifies sincerely that
     none has the right to be worshipped but Allah
     and Muhammad is his Apostle, except that Allah,
     will save him from the Hell-fire." Mu'adh said, "O
     Allah's Apostle ! Should I not inform the people
     about it so that they may have glad tidings?" He
     replied, "When the people hear about it, they will
     solely depend on it." Then Mu'adh narrated the
     above-mentioned Hadith just before his death,
     being afraid of committing sin (by not telling the
     knowledge). 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 131: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I was informed that the Prophet had said to
     Mu'adh, "Whosoever will meet Allah without
     associating anything in worship with Him will go
     to Paradise." Mu'adh asked the Prophet, "Should
     I not inform the people of this good news?" The
     Prophet replied, "No, I am afraid, lest they
     should depend upon it (absolutely)." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 132: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     Um-Sulaim came to Allah's Apostle and said,
     "Verily, Allah is not shy of (telling you) the truth.
     Is it necessary for a woman to take a bath after
     she has a wet dream (nocturnal sexual
     discharge?) The Prophet replied, "Yes, if she
     notices a discharge." Um Salama, then covered
     her face and asked, "O Allah's Apostle! Does a
     woman get a discharge?" He replied, "Yes, let
     your right hand be in dust (An Arabic expression
     you say to a person when you contradict his
     statement meaning "you will not achieve
     goodness"), and that is why the son resembles his
     mother." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 133: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Once Allah's Apostle said, "Amongst the trees
     there is a tree, the leaves of which do not fall and
     is like a Muslim, tell me the name of that tree."
     Everybody started thinking about the trees of the
     desert areas and I thought of the date-palm tree
     but felt shy (to answer). The others asked, "O
     Allah's Apostle! inform us of it." He replied, "it is
     the date-palm tree." I told my father what had
     come to my mind and on that he said, "Had you
     said it I would have preferred it to such and such
     a thing that I might possess." 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 134: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     I used to get the emotional urethral discharge
     frequently so I requested Al-Miqdad to ask the
     Prophet about it. Al-Miqdad asked him and he
     replied, "One has to perform ablution (after it)."
     (See Hadith No. 269). 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 135: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar said: "A man got up in the
     mosque and said: O Allah's Apostle 'At which
     place you order us that we should assume the
     Ihram?' Allah's Apostle replied, 'The residents of
     Medina should assure the Ihram from
     Dhil-Hulaifa, the people of Syria from Al-Ju,hfa
     and the people of Najd from Qarn." Ibn 'Umar
     further said, "The people consider that Allah's
     Apostle had also said, 'The residents of Yemen
     should assume Ihram from Yalamlam.' " Ibn
     'Umar used to say, "I do not: remember whether
     Allah's Apostle had said the last statement or
     not?" 


Volume 1, Book 3, Number 136: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     A man asked the Prophet : "What (kinds of
     clothes) should a Muhrim (a Muslim intending to
     perform 'Umra or Hajj) wear? He replied, "He
     should not wear a shirt, a turban, trousers, a
     head cloak or garment scented with saffron or
     Wars (kinds of perfumes). And if he has n
     slippers, then he can use Khuffs (leather socks)
     but the socks should be cut short so as to make
     the ankles bare." (See Hadith No. 615, Vol. 2). 

Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 4: 

        Ablutions (Wudu') 



Volume 1, Book 4, Number 137: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The prayer of a person
     who does ,Hadath (passes, urine, stool or wind)
     is not accepted till he performs (repeats) the
     ablution." A person from Hadaramout asked
     Abu Huraira, "What is 'Hadath'?" Abu Huraira
     replied, " 'Hadath' means the passing of wind
     from the anus." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 138: 

     Narrated Nu'am Al-Mujmir: 

     Once I went up the roof of the mosque, along
     with Abu Huraira. He perform ablution and said,
     "I heard the Prophet saying, "On the Day of
     Resurrection, my followers will be called
     "Al-Ghurr-ul-Muhajjalun" from the trace of
     ablution and whoever can increase the area of his
     radiance should do so (i.e. by performing
     ablution regularly).' " 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 139: 

     Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim: 

     My uncle asked Allah's Apostle about a person
     who imagined to have passed wind during the
     prayer. Allah' Apostle replied: "He should not
     leave his prayers unless he hears sound or smells
     something." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 140: 

     Narrated Kuraib: 

     Ibn 'Abbas said, "The Prophet slept till he snored
     and then prayed (or probably lay till his breath
     sounds were heard and then got up and
     prayed)." Ibn 'Abbas added: "I stayed overnight
     in the house of my aunt, Maimuna, the Prophet
     slept for a part of the night, (See Fateh-al-Bari
     page 249, Vol. 1), and late in the night, he got up
     and performed ablution from a hanging water
     skin, a light (perfect) ablution and stood up for
     the prayer. I, too, performed a similar ablution,
     then I went and stood on his left. He drew me to
     his right and prayed as much as Allah wished,
     and again lay and slept till his breath sounds were
     heard. Later on the Mua'dhdhin (callmaker for
     the prayer) came to him and informed him that it
     was time for Prayer. The Prophet went with him
     for the prayer without performing a new
     ablution." (Sufyan said to 'Amr that some people
     said, "The eyes of Allah's Apostle sleep but his
     heart does not sleep." 'Amr replied, "I heard
     'Ubaid bin 'Umar saying that the dreams of
     Prophets were Divine Inspiration, and then he
     recited the verse: 'I (Abraham) see in a dream,
     (O my son) that I offer you in sacrifice (to
     Allah)." (37.102) (See Hadith No. 183) 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 141: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     Allah's Apostle proceeded from 'Arafat till when
     he reached the mountain pass, he dismounted,
     urinated and then performed ablution but not a
     perfect one. I said to him, ("Is it the time for) the
     prayer, O Allah's Apostle?" He said, "The (place
     of) prayer is ahead of you." He rode till when he
     reached Al-Muzdalifa, he dismounted and
     performed ablution and a perfect one, The (call
     for) Iqama was pronounced and he led the
     Maghrib prayer. Then everybody made his camel
     kneel down at its place. Then the Iqama was
     pronounced for the 'Isha' prayer which the
     Prophet led and no prayer was offered in
     between the two . prayers ('Isha' and Maghrib). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 142: 

     Narrated 'Ata' bin Yasar: 

     Ibn 'Abbas performed ablution and washed his
     face (in the following way): He ladled out a
     handful of water, rinsed his mouth and washed
     his nose with it by putting in water and then
     blowing it out. He then, took another handful (of
     water) and did like this (gesturing) joining both
     hands, and washed his face, took another handful
     of water and washed his right forearm. He again
     took another handful of water and washed his left
     forearm, and passed wet hands over his head
     and took another handful of water and poured it
     over his right foot (up to his ankles) and washed
     it thoroughly and similarly took another handful of
     water and washed thoroughly his left foot (up to
     the ankles) and said, "I saw Allah's Apostle
     performing ablution in this way." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 143: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "If anyone of you on having
     sexual relations with his wife said (and he must
     say it before starting) 'In the name of Allah. O
     Allah! Protect us from Satan and also protect
     what you bestow upon us (i.e. the coming
     offspring) from Satan, and if it is destined that
     they should have a child then, Satan will never be
     able to harm that offspring." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 144: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Whenever the Prophet went to answer the call of
     nature, he used to say, "Allah-umma inni a'udhu
     bika minal khubuthi wal khaba'ith i.e. O Allah, I
     seek Refuge with You from all offensive and
     wicked things (evil deeds and evil spirits)." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 145: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once the Prophet entered a lavatory and I
     placed water for his ablution. He asked, "Who
     placed it?" He was informed accordingly and so
     he said, "O Allah! Make him (Ibn 'Abbas) a
     learned scholar in religion (Islam)." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 146: 

     Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you goes to an
     open space for answering the call of nature he
     should neither face nor turn his back towards the
     Qibla; he should either face the east or the west."


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 147: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     People say, "Whenever you sit for answering the
     call of nature, you should not face the Qibla or
     Bait-ulMaqdis (Jerusalem)." I told them. "Once I
     went up the roof of our house and I saw Allah's
     Apostle answering the call of nature while sitting
     on two bricks facing Bait-ul-Maqdis (Jerusalem)
     (but there was a screen covering him. '
     (FatehAl-Bari, Page 258, Vol. 1). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 148: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The wives of the Prophet used to go to
     Al-Manasi, a vast open place (near Baqia at
     Medina) to answer the call of nature at night.
     'Umar used to say to the Prophet "Let your
     wives be veiled," but Allah's Apostle did not do
     so. One night Sauda bint Zam'a the wife of the
     Prophet went out at 'Isha' time and she was a tall
     lady. 'Umar addressed her and said, "I have
     recognized you, O Sauda." He said so, as he
     desired eagerly that the verses of Al-Hijab (the
     observing of veils by the Muslim women) may be
     revealed. So Allah revealed the verses of
     "Al-Hijab" (A complete body cover excluding
     the eyes). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 149: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said to his wives, "You are allowed
     to go out to answer the call of nature. " 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 150: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     I went up to the roof of Hafsa's house for some
     job and I saw Allah's Apostle answering the call
     of nature facing Sham (Syria, Jordan, Palestine
     and Lebanon regarded as one country) with his
     back towards the Qibla. (See Hadith No. 147). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 151: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Once I went up the roof of our house and saw
     Allah's Apostle answering the call of nature while
     sitting over two bricks facing Bait-ul-Maqdis
     (Jerusalem). (See Hadith No. 147). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 152: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle went to answer the
     call of nature, I along with another boy used to
     accompany him with a tumbler full of water.
     (Hisham commented, "So that he might wash his
     private parts with it.)" 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 153: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle went to answer the
     call of nature, I along with another boy from us
     used to go behind him with a tumbler full of
     water. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 154: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle went to answer the
     call of nature, I along with another boy used to
     carry a tumbler full of water (for cleaning the
     private parts) and an 'Anza (spear-headed
     stuck). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 155: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whenever anyone of you
     drinks water, he should not breathe in the
     drinking utensil, and whenever anyone of you
     goes to a lavatory, he should neither touch his
     penis nor clean his private parts with his right
     hand." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 156: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada: 

     The Prophet said, "Whenever anyone of you
     makes water he should not hold his penis or
     clean his private parts with his right hand. (And
     while drinking) one should not breathe in the
     drinking utensil ." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 157: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I followed the Prophet while he was going out to
     answer the call of nature. He used not to look
     this way or that. So, when I approached near
     him he said to me, "Fetch for me some stones for
     ' cleaning the privates parts (or said something
     similar), and do not bring a bone or a piece of
     dung." So I brought the stones in the corner of
     my garment and placed them by his side and I
     then went away from him. When he finished
     (from answering the call of nature) he used, them
     . 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 158: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet went out to answer the call of
     nature and asked me to bring three stones. I
     found two stones and searched for the third but
     could not find it. So took a dried piece of dung
     and brought it to him. He took the two stones
     and threw away the dung and said, "This is a
     filthy thing." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 159: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet performed ablution by washing the
     body parts only once. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 160: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid: 

     The Prophet performed ablution by washing the
     body parts twice. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 161: 

     Narrated Humran: 

     (the slave of 'Uthman) I saw 'Uthman bin 'Affan
     asking for a tumbler of water (and when it was
     brought) he poured water over his hands and
     washed them thrice and then put his right hand in
     the water container and rinsed his mouth, washed
     his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it
     out. then he washed his face and forearrlns up to
     the elbows thrice, passed his wet hands over his
     head and washed his feet up to the ankles thrice.
     Then he said, "Allah's Apostle said 'If anyone
     Performs ablution like that of mine and offers a
     two-rak'at prayer during which he does not think
     of anything else (not related to the present
     prayer) then his past sins will be forgiven.' " After
     performing the ablution 'Uthman said, "I am going
     to tell you a Hadith which I would not have told
     you, had I not been compelled by a certain Holy
     Verse (the sub narrator 'Urwa said: This verse is:
     "Verily, those who conceal the clear signs and
     the guidance which we have sent down...)"
     (2:159). I heard the Prophet saying, 'If a man
     performs ablution perfectly and then offers the
     compulsory congregational prayer, Allah will
     forgive his sins committed between that (prayer)
     and the (next) prayer till he offers it. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 162: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever performs ablution
     should clean his nose with water by putting the
     water in it and then blowing it out, and whoever
     cleans his private parts with stones should do it
     with odd number of stones." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 163: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you performs
     ablution he should put water in his nose and then
     blow it out and whoever cleans his private parts
     with stones should do so with odd numbers. And
     whoever wakes up from his sleep should wash
     his hands before putting them in the water for
     ablution, because nobody knows where his
     hands were during sleep." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 164: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr: 

     The Prophet remained behind us on a journey.
     He joined us while we were performing ablution
     for the 'Asr prayer which was over-due and we
     were just passing wet hands over our feet (not
     washing them thoroughly) so he addressed us in
     a loud voice saying twice orthriae, "Save your
     heels from the fire." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 165: 

     Narrated Humran: 

     (the freed slave of 'Uthman bin 'Affan) I saw
     'Uthman bin 'Affan asking (for a tumbler of
     water) to perform ablution (and when it was
     brought) he poured water from it over his hands
     and washed them thrice and then put his right
     hand in the water container and rinsed his mouth
     and washed his nose by putting water in it and
     then blowing it out. Then he washed his face
     thrice and (then) forearms up to the elbows
     thrice, then passed his wet hands over his head
     and then washed each foot thrice. After that
     'Uthman said, "I saw the Prophet performing
     ablution like this of mine, and he said, 'If anyone
     performs ablution like that of mine and offers a
     two-rak'at prayer during which he does not think
     of anything else (not related to the present
     prayer) then his past sins will be forgiven. ' 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 166: 

     Narrated Muhammad Ibn Ziyad: 

     I heard Abu Huraira saying as he passed by us
     while the people were performing ablution from a
     utensil containing water, "Perform ablution
     perfectly and thoroughly for Abul-Qasim (the
     Prophet) said, 'Save your heels from the
     Hell-fire.' " 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 167: 

     Narrated 'Ubaid Ibn Juraij: 

     I asked 'Abdullah bin 'Umar, "O Abu
     'Abdur-Rahman! I saw you doing four things
     which I never saw being done by anyone of you
     companions?" 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "What
     are those, O Ibn Juraij?" I said, "I never saw you
     touching any corner of the Ka'ba except these
     (two) facing south (Yemen) and I saw you
     wearing shoes made of tanned leather and dyeing
     your hair with Hinna; (a kind of dye). I also
     noticed that whenever you were in Mecca, the
     people assume l,hram on seeing the new moon
     crescent (1st of Dhul-Hijja) while you did not
     assume the Ihlal (Ihram)--(Ihram is also called
     Ihlal which means 'Loud calling' because a
     Muhrim has to recite Talbiya aloud when
     assuming the state of Ihram)--till the 8th of
     Dhul-Hijja (Day of Tarwiya). 'Abdullah replied,
     "Regarding the corners of Ka'ba, I never saw
     Allah's Apostle touching except those facing
     south (Yemen) and regarding the tanned leather
     shoes, no doubt I saw Allah's Apostle wearing
     non-hairy shoes and he used to perform ablution
     while wearing the shoes (i.e. wash his feet and
     then put on the shoes). So I love to wear similar
     shoes. And about the dyeing of hair with Hinna;
     no doubt I saw Allah's Apostle dyeing his hair
     with it and that is why I like to dye (my hair with
     it). Regarding Ihlal, I did not see Allah's Apostle
     assuming Ihlal till he set out for Hajj (on the 8th
     of Dhul-Hijja)." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 168: 

     Narrated Um-'Atiya: 

     that the Prophet at the time of washing his
     deceased daughter had said to them, "Start from
     the right side beginning with those parts which
     are washed in ablution." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 169: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to like to start from the right
     side on wearing shoes, combing his hair and
     cleaning or washing himself and on doing
     anything else. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 170: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     saw Allah's Apostle when the 'Asr prayer was
     due and the people searched for water to
     perform ablution but they could not find it. Later
     on (a pot full of) water for ablution was brought
     to Allah's Apostle . He put his hand in that pot
     and ordered the people to perform ablution from
     it. I saw the water springing out from underneath
     his fingers till all of them performed the ablution
     (it was one of the miracles of the Prophet). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 171: 

     Narrated Ibn Sirrn: 

     I said to 'Ablda, "I have some of the hair of the
     Prophet which I got from Anas or from his
     family." 'Abida replied. "No doubt if I had a
     single hair of that it would have been dearer to
     me than the whole world and whatever is in it." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 172: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When Allah's Apostle got his head shaved, Abu-
     Talha was the first to take some of his hair. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 173: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If a dog drinks from the
     utensil of anyone of you it is essential to wash it
     seven times." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 174: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A man saw a dog eating mud
     from (the severity of) thirst. So, that man took a
     shoe (and filled it) with water and kept on
     pouring the water for the dog till it quenched its
     thirst. So Allah approved of his deed and made
     him to enter Paradise." And narrated Hamza bin
     'Abdullah: My father said. "During the lifetime of
     Allah's Apostle, the dogs used to urinate, and
     pass through the mosques (come and go),
     nevertheless they never used to sprinkle water on
     it (urine of the dog.)" 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 175: 

     Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim: 

     I asked the Prophet (about the hunting dogs) and
     he replied, "If you let loose (with Allah's name)
     your tamed dog after a game and it hunts it, you
     may eat it, but if the dog eats of (that game) then
     do not eat it because the dog has hunted it for
     itself." I further said, "Sometimes I send my dog
     for hunting and find another dog with it. He said,
     "Do not eat the game for you have mentioned
     Allah's name only on sending your dog and not
     the other dog." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 176: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "A person is considered in
     prayer as long as he is waiting for the prayer in
     the mosque as long as he does not do Hadath."
     A non-Arab man asked, "O Abii Huraira! What
     is Hadath?" I replied, "It is the passing of wind
     (from the anus) (that is one of the types of
     Hadath)." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 177: 

     Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim: 

     My uncle said: The Prophet said, "One should
     not leave his prayer unless he hears sound or
     smells something." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 178: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     I used to get emotional urethral discharges
     frequently and felt shy to ask Allah's Apostle
     about it. So I requested Al-Miqdad bin
     Al-Aswad to ask (the Prophet ) about it.
     Al-Miqdad asked him and he replied, "On has to
     perform ablution (after it)." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 179: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid: 

     I asked 'Uthman bin 'Affan about a person who
     engaged in intercourse but did no discharge.
     'Uthman replied, "He should perform ablution
     like the one for ar ordinary prayer but he must
     wash his penis." 'Uthman added, "I heard it from
     Allah's Apostle." I asked 'Ali Az-Zubair, Talha
     and Ubai bin Ka'b about it and they, too, gave
     the same reply. (This order was cancelled later
     on and taking a bath became necessary for such
     cases). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 180: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khud: 

     Allah's Apostle sent for a Ansari man who came
     with water dropping from his head. The Prophet
     said, "Perhaps we have forced you to hurry up,
     haven't we?" The Ansari replied, "Yes." Allah's
     Apostle further said, "If you are forced to hurry
     up (during intercourse) or you do not discharge
     then ablution is due on you (This order was
     cancelled later on, i.e. one has to take a bath). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 181: 

     Narrated Usama bin Zaid: 

     "When Allah's Apostle departed from 'Arafat, he
     turned towards a mountain pass where he
     answered the call of nature. (After he had
     finished) I poured water and he performed
     ablution and then I said to him, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Will you offer the prayer?" He replied,
     "The Musalla (place of the prayer) is ahead of
     you (in Al-Muzdalifa)." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 182: 

     Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba: 

     I was in the company of Allah's Apostle on one
     of the journeys and he went out to answer the
     call of nature (and after he finished) I poured
     water and he performed ablution; he washed his
     face, forearms and passed his wet hand over his
     head and over the two Khuff, (leather socks). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 183: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     that he stayed overnight in the house of Maimuna
     the wife of the Prophet, his aunt. He added : I lay
     on the bed (cushion transversally) while Allah's
     Apostle and his wife lay in the length-wise
     direction of the cushion. Allah's Apostle slept till
     the middle of the night, either a bit before or a bit
     after it and then woke up, rubbing the traces of
     sleep off his face with his hands. He then, recited
     the last ten verses of Sura Al-Imran, got up and
     went to a hanging water-skin. He then Performed
     the ablution from it and it was a perfect ablution,
     and then stood up to offer the prayer. I, too, got
     up and did as the Prophet had done. Then I went
     and stood by his side. He placed his right hand
     on my head and caught my right ear and twisted
     it. He prayed two Rakat then two Rakat and two
     Rakat and then two Rakat and then two Rakat
     and then two Rakat (separately six times), and
     finally one Rak'a (the Witr). Then he lay down
     again in the bed till the Mu'adhdhin came to him
     where upon the Prophet got up, offered a two
     light Rakat prayer and went out and led the Fajr
     prayer 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 184: 

     Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr: 

     I came to 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet during
     the solar eclipse. The people were standing and
     offering the prayer and she was also praying. I
     asked her, "What is wrong with the people?" She
     beckoned with her hand towards the sky and
     said, "Subhan Allah." I asked her, "Is there a
     sign?" She pointed out, "Yes." So I, too, stood
     for the prayer till I fell unconscious and later on I
     poured water on my head. After the prayer,
     Allah's Apostle praised and glorified Allah and
     said, "Just now I have seen something which I
     never saw before at this place of mine, including
     Paradise and Hell. I have been inspired (and
     have understood) that you will be put to trials in
     your graves and these trials will be like the trials
     of Ad-Dajjal, or nearly like it (the sub narrator is
     not sure of what Asma' said). Angels will come
     to every one of you and ask, 'What do you know
     about this man?' A believer will reply, 'He is
     Muhammad, Allah's Apostle , and he came to us
     with self-evident truth and guidance. So we
     accepted his teaching, believed and followed
     him.' Then the angels will say to him to sleep in
     peace as they have come to know that he was a
     believer. On the other hand a hypocrite or a
     doubtful person will reply, 'I do not know but
     heard the people saying something and so I said
     the same.' " 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 185: 

     Narrated Yahya Al-Mazini: 

     A person asked 'Abdullah bin Zaid who was the
     grandfather of 'Amr bin Yahya, "Can you show
     me how Allah's Apostle used to perform
     ablution?" 'Abdullah bin Zaid replied in the
     affirmative and asked for water. He poured it on
     his hands and washed them twice, then he rinsed
     his mouth thrice and washed his nose with water
     thrice by putting water in it and blowing it out. He
     washed his face thrice and after that he washed
     his forearms up to the elbows twice and then
     passed his wet hands over his head from its front
     to its back and vice versa (beginning from the
     front and taking them to the back of his head up
     to the nape of the neck and then brought them to
     the front again from where he had started) and
     washed his feet (up to the ankles). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 186: 

     Narrated 'Amr: 

     My father saw 'Amr bin Abi Hasan asking
     'Abdullah bin Zaid about the ablution of the
     Prophet. 'Abdullah bin Zaid asked for
     earthen-ware pot containing water and in front of
     them performed ablution like that of the Prophet .
     He poured water from the pot over his hand and
     washed his hands thrice and then he put his
     hands in the pot and rinsed his mouth and
     washed his nose by putting water in it and then
     blowing it out with three handfuls of water. Again
     he put his hand in the water and washed his face
     thrice and washed his forearms up to the elbows
     twice; and then put his hands in the water and
     then passed them over his head by bringing them
     to the front and then to the rear of the head once,
     and then he washed his feet up to the ankles. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 187: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     Allah's Apostle came to us at noon and water for
     ablution was brought to him. After he had
     performed ablution, the remaining water was
     taken by the people and they started smearing
     their bodies with it (as a blessed thing). The
     Prophet offered two Rakat of the Zuhr prayer
     and then two Rakat of the 'Asr prayer while an
     'Anza (spear-headed stick) was there (as a
     Sutra) in front of him. Abu Musa said: The
     Prophet asked for a tumbler containing water
     and washed both his hands and face in it and
     then threw a mouthful of water in the tumbler and
     said to both of us (Abu Musa and Bilal), "Drink
     from the tumbler and pour some of its water on
     your faces and chests." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 188: 

     Narrated Ibn Shihab: 

     Mahmud bin Ar-Rabi' who was the person on
     whose face the Prophet had ejected a mouthful
     of water from his family's well while he was a
     boy, and 'Urwa (on the authority of Al-Miswar
     and others) who testified each other, said,
     "Whenever the Prophet , performed ablution, his
     companions were nearly fighting for the remains
     of the water." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 189: 

     Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid: 

     My aunt took me to the Prophet and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! This son of my sister has got a
     disease in his legs." So he passed his hands on
     my head and prayed for Allah's blessings for me;
     then he performed ablution and I drank from the
     remaining water. I stood behind him and saw the
     seal of Prophethood between his shoulders, and
     it was like the "Zir-al-Hijla" (means the button of
     a small tent, but some said 'egg of a partridge.'
     etc.) 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 190: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Yahya: 

     (on the authority of his father) 'Abdullah bin Zaid
     poured water on his hands from a utensil
     containing water and washed them and then with
     one handful of water he rinsed his mouth and
     cleaned his nose by putting water in it and then
     blowing it out. He repeated it thrice. He, then,
     washed his hands and forearms up to the elbows
     twice and passed wet hands over his head, both
     forwards and backwards, and washed his feet up
     to the ankles and said, "This is the ablution of
     Allah's Apostle." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 191: 

     Narrated Amr bin Yahya: 

     My father said, "I saw Amr bin Abi Hasan asking
     'Abdullah bin Zaid about the ablution of the
     Prophet. Abdullah bin Zaid asked for an
     earthenware pot containing water and performed
     ablution in front of them. He poured water over
     his hands and washed them thrice. Then he put
     his (right) hand in the pot and rinsed his mouth
     and washed his nose by putting water in it and
     then blowing it out thrice with three handfuls of
     water Again he put his hand in the water and
     washed his face thrice. After that he put his hand
     in the pot and washed his forearms up to the
     elbows twice and then again put his hand in the
     water and passed wet hands over his head by
     bringing them to the front and then to the back
     and once more he put his hand in the pot and
     washed his feet (up to the ankles.)" 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 192: 

     Narrated Wuhaib: that he (the Prophet in
     narration 191 above) had passed his wet hands 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 193: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Allah's Apostle came to visit me while I was sick
     and unconscious. He performed ablution and
     sprinkled the remaining water on me and I
     became conscious and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     To whom will my inheritance go as I have neither
     ascendants nor descendants?" Then the Divine
     verses regarding Fara'id (inheritance) were
     revealed. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 194: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     It was the time for prayer, and those whose
     houses were near got up and went to their
     people (to perform ablution), and there remained
     some people (sitting). Then a painted stove pot
     (Mikhdab) containing water was brought to
     Allah's Apostles The pot was small, not broad
     enough for one to spread one's hand in; yet all
     the people performed ablution. (The sub narrator
     said, "We asked Anas, 'How many persons were
     you?' Anas replied 'We were eighty or more").
     (It was one of the miracles of Allah's Apostle). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 195: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     Once the Prophet asked for a tumbler containing
     water. He washed his hands and face in it and
     also threw a mouthful of water in it. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 196: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid: 

     Once Allah's Apostle came to us and we brought
     out water for him in a brass pot. He performed
     ablution thus: He washed his face thrice, and his
     forearms to the elbows twice, then passed his
     wet hands lightly over the head from front to rear
     and brought them to front again and washed his
     feet (up to the ankles). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 197: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When the ailment of the Prophet became
     aggravated and his disease became severe, he
     asked his wives to permit him to be nursed
     (treated) in my house. So they gave him the
     permission. Then the Prophet came (to my
     house) with the support of two men, and his legs
     were dragging on the ground, between 'Abbas,
     and another man." 'Ubaid-Ullah (the sub
     narrator) said, "I informed 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas
     of what'Aisha said. Ibn 'Abbas said: 'Do you
     know who was the other man?' I replied in the
     negative. Ibn 'Abbas said, 'He was 'Ali (bin Abi
     Talib)." 'Aisha further said, "When the Prophet
     came to my house and his sickness became
     aggravated he ordered us to pour seven skins full
     of water on him, so that he might give some
     advice to the people. So he was seated in a
     Mikhdab (brass tub) belonging to Hafsa, the wife
     of the Prophet. Then, all of us started pouring
     water on him from the water skins till he
     beckoned to us to stop and that we have done
     (what he wanted us to do). After that he went
     out to the people." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 198: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Yahya: 

     (on the authority of his father) My uncle used to
     perform ablution extravagantly and once he
     asked 'Abdullah bin Zaid to tell him how he had
     seen the Prophet performing ablution. He asked
     for an earthen-ware pot containing water, and
     poured water from it on his hands and washed
     them thrice, and then put his hand in the
     earthen-ware pot and rinsed his mouth and
     washed his nose by putting water in it and then
     blowing it Out thrice with one handful of water;
     he again put his hand in the water and took a
     handful of water and washed his face thrice, then
     washed his hands up to the elbows twice, and
     took water with his hand, and passed it over his
     head from front to back and then from back to
     front, and then washed his feet (up to the ankles)
     and said, "I saw the Prophet performing ablution
     in that way." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 199: 

     Narrated Thabit: 

     Anas said, "The Prophet asked for water and a
     tumbler with a broad base and no so deep,
     containing a small quantity of water, was brought
     to him whereby he put his fingers in it." Anas
     further said, ' noticed the water springing out
     from amongst his fingers." Anas added, '
     estimated that the people who performed
     ablution with it numbered between seventy to
     eighty." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 200: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet used to take a bath with one Saor
     up to five Mudds (1 Sa'= Mudds) of water and
     used to perform ablution with one Mudd of
     water. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 201: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas said, "The Prophet passed
     wet hands over his Khuffs." 'Abdullah bin 'Umar
     asked Umar about it. 'Umar replied in the
     affirmative and added, "Whenever Sa'd narrates
     a Hadith from the Prophet, there is no need to
     ask anyone else about it." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 202: 

     Narrated Al-Mughlra bin Shu'ba: 

     Once Allah's Apostle went out to answer the call
     of nature and I followed him with a tumbler
     containing water, and when he finished, I poured
     water and he performed ablution and passed wet
     hands over his Khuffs. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 203: 

     Narrated Ja'far bin 'Amr bin Umaiya Ad-Damri: 

     My father said, "I saw the Prophet passing wet
     hands over his Khuffs." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 204: 

     Narrated Ja'far bin 'Amr: 

     My father said, "I saw the Prophet passing wet
     hands over his turban and Khuffs (leather
     socks)." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 205: 

     Narrated 'Urwa bin Al-Mughira: 

     My father said, "Once I was in the company of
     the Prophet on a journey and I dashed to take
     off his Khuffs. He ordered me to leave them as
     he had put them after performing ablution. So he
     passed wet hands or them. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 206: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle ate a piece of cooked mutton
     from the shoulder region and prayed without
     repeating ablution. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 207: 

     Narrated Ja'far bin 'Amr bin Umaiya: 

     My father said, "I saw Allah's Apostle taking a
     piece of (cooked) mutton from the shoulder
     region and then he was called for prayer. He put
     his knife down and prayed without repeating
     ablution." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 208: 

     Narrated Suwaid bin Al-Nu'man: 

     In the year of the conquest of Khaibar I went
     with Allah's Apostle till we reached Sahba,' a
     place near Khaibar, where Allah's Apostle
     offered the 'Asr prayer and asked for food.
     Nothing but Sawrq was brought. He ordered it
     to be moistened with water. He and all of us ate
     it and the Prophet got up for the evening prayer
     (Maghrib prayer), rinsed his mouth with water
     and we did the same, and he then prayed without
     repeating the ablution. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 209: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     The Prophet ate (a piece of) mutton from the
     shoulder region and then prayed without
     repeating the ablution. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 210: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Allah's Apostle drank milk, rinsed his mouth and
     said, "It has fat." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 211: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you feels
     drowsy while praying he should go to bed (sleep)
     till his slumber is over because in praying while
     drowsy one does not know whether one is
     asking for forgiveness or for a bad thing for
     oneself." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 212: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "If anyone of you feels drowsy
     while praying, he should sleep till he understands
     what he is saying (reciting)." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 213: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin 'Amir: 

     Anas said, "The Prophet used to perform
     ablution for every prayer." I asked Anas, "What
     you used to do?' Anas replied, "We used to pray
     with the same ablution until we break it with
     Hadath." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 214: 

     Narrated Suwaid bin Nu'man: 

     In the year of the conquest of Khaibar I went
     with Allah's Apostle till we reached As-Sahba'
     where Allah's Apostle led the 'Asr prayer and
     asked for the food. Nothing but Sawiq was
     brought and we ate it and drank (water). The
     Prophet got up for the (Maghrib) Prayer, rinsed
     his mouth with water and then led the prayer
     without repeating the ablution. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 215: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once the Prophet, while passing through one of
     the grave-yards of Medina or Mecca heard the
     voices of two persons who were being tortured
     in their graves. The Prophet said, "These two
     persons are being tortured not for a major sin (to
     avoid)." The Prophet then added, "Yes! (they are
     being tortured for a major sin). Indeed, one of
     them never saved himself from being soiled with
     his urine while the other used to go about with
     calumnies (to make enmiy between friends). The
     Prophet then asked for a green leaf of a
     date-palm tree, broke it into two pieces and put
     one on each grave. On being asked why he had
     done so, he replied, "I hope that their torture
     might be lessened, till these get dried." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 216: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Whenever the Prophet went to answer the call of
     nature, I used to bring water with which he used
     to clean his private parts. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 217: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet once passed by two graves and
     said, "These two persons are being tortured not
     for a major sin (to avoid). One of them never
     saved himself from being soiled with his urine,
     while the other used to go about with
     calumnies(to make enmity between friends)." The
     Prophet then took a green leaf of a date-palm
     tree, split it into (pieces) and fixed one on each
     grave. They said, "O Allah's Apostle! Why have
     you done so?" He replied, "I hope that their
     punishment might be lessened till these (the
     pieces of the leaf) become dry." (See the
     foot-note of Hadith 215). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 218: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet saw a Bedouin making water in the
     mosque and told the people not to disturb him.
     When he finished, the Prophet asked for some
     water and poured it over (the urine). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 219: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A Bedouin stood up and started making water in
     the mosque. The people caught him but the
     Prophet ordered them to leave him and to pour a
     bucket or a tumbler of water over the place
     where he had passed the urine. The Prophet then
     said, "You have been sent to make things easy
     and not to make them difficult." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 220: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said as above (219). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 221: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     A Bedouin came and passed urine in one corner
     of the mosque. The people shouted at him but
     the Prophet stopped them till he finished
     urinating. The Prophet ordered them to spill a
     bucket of water over that place and they did so. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 222: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the mother of faithful believers) A child was
     brought to Allah's Apostle and it urinated on the
     garment of the Prophet. The Prophet asked for
     water and poured it over the soiled place. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 223: 

     Narrated Um Qais bint Mihsin: 

     I brought my young son, who had not started
     eating (ordinary food) to Allah's Apostle who
     took him and made him sit in his lap. The child
     urinated on the garment of the Prophet, so he
     asked for water and poured it over the soiled
     (area) and did not wash it. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 224: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     Once the Prophet went to the dumps of some
     people and passed urine while standing. He then
     asked for water and so I brought it to him and he
     performed ablution. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 225: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa': 

     The Prophet and I walked till we reached the
     dumps of some people. He stood, as any one of
     you stands, behind a wall and urinated. I went
     away, but he beckoned me to come. So I
     approached him and stood near his back till he
     finished. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 226: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari used to lay great stress on
     the question of urination and he used to say, "If
     anyone from Bani Israel happened to soil his
     clothes with urine, he used to cut that portion
     away." Hearing that, Hudhaifa said to Abu Wail,
     "I wish he (Abu Musa) didn't (lay great stress on
     that matter)." Hudhaifa added, "Allah's Apostle
     went to the dumps of some people and urinated
     while standing." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 227: 

     Narrated Asma': 

     A woman came to the Prophet and said, "If
     anyone of us gets menses in her clothes then
     what should she do?" He replied, "She should
     (take hold of the soiled place), rub it and put it in
     the water and rub it in order to remove the traces
     of blood and then pour water over it. Then she
     can pray in it." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 228: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Fatima bint Abi Hubaish came to the Prophet
     and said, "O Allah's Apostle I get persistent
     bleeding from the uterus and do not become
     clean. Shall I give up my prayers?" Allah's
     Apostle replied, "No, because it is from a blood
     vessel and not the menses. So when your real
     menses begins give up your prayers and when it
     has finished wash off the blood (take a bath) and
     offer your prayers." Hisham (the sub narrator)
     narrated that his father had also said, (the
     Prophet told her): "Perform ablution for every
     prayer till the time of the next period comes." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 229: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I used to wash the traces of Janaba (semen) from
     the clothes of the Prophet and he used to go for
     prayers while traces of water were still on it
     (water spots were still visible). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 230: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     as above (229). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 231: 

     Narrated Sulaiman bin Yasar: 

     I asked 'Aisha about the clothes soiled with
     semen. She replied, "I used to wash it off the
     clothes of Allah's Apostle and he would go for
     the prayer while water spots were still visible. " 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 232: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun: 

     I heard Sulaiman bin Yasar talking about the
     clothes soiled with semen. He said that 'Aisha
     had said, "I used to wash it off the clothes of
     Allah's Apostle and he would go for the prayers
     while water spots were still visible on them. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 233: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I used to wash the semen off the clothes of the
     Prophet and even then I used to notice one or
     more spots on them. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 234: 

     Narrated Abu Qilaba: 

     Anas said, "Some people of 'Ukl or 'Uraina tribe
     came to Medina and its climate did not suit them.
     So the Prophet ordered them to go to the herd of
     (Milch) camels and to drink their milk and urine
     (as a medicine). So they went as directed and
     after they became healthy, they killed the
     shepherd of the Prophet and drove away all the
     camels. The news reached the Prophet early in
     the morning and he sent (men) in their pursuit and
     they were captured and brought at noon. He then
     ordered to cut their hands and feet (and it was
     done), and their eyes were branded with heated
     pieces of iron, They were put in 'Al-Harra' and
     when they asked for water, no water was given
     to them." Abu Qilaba said, "Those people
     committed theft and murder, became infidels
     after embracing Islam and fought against Allah
     and His Apostle ." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 235: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Prior to the construction of the mosque, the
     Prophet offered the prayers at sheep-folds. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 236: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     Allah's Apostle was asked regarding ghee
     (cooking butter) in which a mouse had fallen. He
     said, "Take out the mouse and throw away the
     ghee around it and use the rest." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 237: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     The Prophet was asked regarding ghee in which
     a mouse had fallen. He said, "Take out the
     mouse and throw away the ghee around it (and
     use the rest.)" 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 238: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "A wound which a Muslim
     receives in Allah's cause will appear on the Day
     of Resurrection as it was at the time of infliction;
     blood will be flowing from the wound and its
     color will be that of the blood but will smell like
     musk." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 239: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "We (Muslims) are the last
     (people to come in the world) but (will be) the
     foremost (on the Day of Resurrection)." The
     same narrator told that the Prophet had said,
     "You should not pass urine in stagnant water
     which is not flowing then (you may need to) wash
     in it." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 240: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     While Allah's Apostle was prostrating (as stated
     below). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 241: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud: 

     Once the Prophet was offering prayers at the
     Ka'ba. Abu Jahl was sitting with some of his
     companions. One of them said to the others,
     "Who amongst you will bring the abdominal
     contents (intestines, etc.) of a camel of Bani so
     and so and put it on the back of Muhammad,
     when he prostrates?" The most unfortunate of
     them got up and brought it. He waited till the
     Prophet prostrated and then placed it on his
     back between his shoulders. I was watching but
     could not do any thing. I wish I had some people
     with me to hold out against them. They started
     laughing and falling on one another. Allah's
     Apostle was in prostration and he did not lift his
     head up till Fatima (Prophet's daughter) came
     and threw that (camel's abdominal contents)
     away from his back. He raised his head and said
     thrice, "O Allah! Punish Quraish." So it was hard
     for Abu Jahl and his companions when the
     Prophet invoked Allah against them as they had a
     conviction that the prayers and invocations were
     accepted in this city (Mecca). The Prophet said,
     "O Allah! Punish Abu Jahl, 'Utba bin Rabi'a,
     Shaiba bin Rabi'a, Al-Walid bin 'Utba, Umaiya
     bin Khalaf, and 'Uqba bin Al Mu'it (and he
     mentioned the seventh whose name I cannot
     recall). By Allah in Whose Hands my life is, I
     saw the dead bodies of those persons who were
     counted by Allah's Apostle in the Qalib (one of
     the wells) of Badr. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 242: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet once spat in his clothes. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 243: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "All drinks that produce
     intoxication are Haram (forbidden to drink). 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 244: 

     Narrated Abu Hazim: 

     Sahl bin Sa'd As-Sa'idi, was asked by the
     people, "With what was the wound of the
     Prophet treated? Sahl replied, "None remains
     among the people living who knows that better
     than I. 'Ah used to bring water in his shield and
     Fatima used to wash the blood off his face. Then
     straw mat was burnt and the wound was filled
     with it." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 245: 

     Narrated Abu Burda: 

     My father said, "I came to the Prophet and saw
     him carrying a Siwak in his hand and cleansing
     his teeth, saying, 'U' U'," as if he was retching
     while the Siwak was in his mouth." 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 246: 

     Narrated Hudhaifa: 

     Whenever the Prophet got up at night, he used to
     clean his mouth with Siwak. 


Volume 1, Book 4, Number 247: 

     Narrated Al-Bara 'bin 'Azib: 

     The Prophet said to me, "Whenever you go to
     bed perform ablution like that for the prayer, lie
     or your right side and say, "Allahumma aslamtu
     wajhi ilaika, wa fauwadtu amri ilaika, wa alja'tu
     Zahri ilaika raghbatan wa rahbatan ilaika. La
     Malja' wa la manja minka illa ilaika. Allahumma
     amantu bikitabika-l-ladhi anzalta wa bina-biyika-l
     ladhi arsalta" (O Allah! I surrender to You and
     entrust all my affairs to You and depend upon
     You for Your Blessings both with hope and fear
     of You. There is no fleeing from You, and there
     is no place of protection and safety except with
     You O Allah! I believe in Your Book (the
     Qur'an) which You have revealed and in Your
     Prophet (Muhammad) whom You have sent).
     Then if you die on that very night, you will die
     with faith (i.e. or the religion of Islam). Let the
     aforesaid words be your last utterance (before
     sleep)." I repeated it before the Prophet and
     when I reached "Allahumma amantu
     bikitabika-l-ladhi anzalta (O Allah I believe in
     Your Book which You have revealed)." I said,
     "Wa-rasulika (and your Apostle)." The Prophet
     said, "No, (but say): 'Wanabiyika-l-ladhi arsalta
     (Your Prophet whom You have sent), instead." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 5: 

          Bathing (Ghusl) 



Volume 1, Book 5, Number 248: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever the Prophet took a bath after Janaba
     he started by washing his hands and then
     performed ablution like that for the prayer. After
     that he would put his fingers in water and move
     the roots of his hair with them, and then pour
     three handfuls of water over his head and then
     pour water all over his body. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 249: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle
     performed ablution like that for the prayer but
     did not wash his feet. He washed off the
     discharge from his private parts and then poured
     water over his body. He withdrew his feet from
     that place (the place where he took the bath) and
     then washed them. And that was his way of
     taking the bath of Janaba. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 250: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet and I used to take a bath from a
     single pot called 'Faraq'. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 251: 

     Narrated Abu Salama: 

     'Aisha's brother and I went to 'Aisha and he
     asked her about the bath of the Prophet. She
     brought a pot containing about a Sa' of water
     and took a bath and poured it over her head and
     at what time there was a screen between her and
     us. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 252: 

     Narrated Abu Ja'far: 

     While I and my father were with Jabir bin
     'Abdullah, some People asked him about taking
     a bath He replied, "A Sa' of water is sufficient for
     you." A man said, "A Sa' is not sufficient for me."
     Jabir said, "A Sa was sufficient for one who had
     more hair than you and was better than you
     (meaning the Prophet)." And then Jabir (put on)
     his garment and led the prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 253: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet and Maimuna used to take a bath
     from a single pot. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 254: 

     Narrated Jubair bin Mutim: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "As for me, I pour water
     three times on my head." And he pointed with
     both his hands. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 255: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet used to pour water three times on
     his head. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 256: 

     Narrated Abu Ja'far: 

     Jabir bin Abdullah said to me, "Your cousin
     (Hasan bin Muhammad bin Al-Hanafiya) came
     to me and asked about the bath of Janaba. I
     replied, 'The Prophet uses to take three handfuls
     of water, pour them on his head and then pour
     more water over his body.' Al-Hasan said to me,
     'I am a hairy man.' I replied, 'The Prophet had
     more hair than you'. " 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 257: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     I placed water for the bath of the Prophet. He
     washed his hands twice or thrice and then
     poured water on his left hand and washed his
     private parts. He rubbed his hands over the earth
     (and cleaned them), rinsed his mouth, washed his
     nose by putting water in it and blowing it out,
     washed his face and both forearms and then
     poured water over his body. Then he withdrew
     from that place and washed his feet. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 258: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever the Prophet took the bath of Janaba
     (sexual relation or wet dream) he asked for the
     Hilab or some other scent. He used to take it in
     his hand, rub it first over the right side of his head
     and then over the left and then rub the middle of
     his head with both hands. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 259: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     I placed water for the bath of the Prophet and he
     poured water with his right hand on his left and
     washed them. Then he washed his private parts
     and rubbed his hands on the ground, washed
     them with water, rinsed his mouth and washed
     his nose by putting water in it and blowing it out,
     washed his face and poured water on his head.
     He withdrew from that place and washed his
     feet. A piece of cloth (towel) was given to him
     but he did not use it. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 260: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     The Prophet took the bath of Janaba. (sexual
     relation or wet dream). He first cleaned his
     private parts with his hand, and then rubbed
     it(that hand) on the wall (earth) and washed it.
     Then he performed ablution like that for the
     prayer, and after the bath he washed his feet. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 261: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The Prophet and I used to take a bath from a
     single pot of water and our hands used to go in
     the pot after each other in turn. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 262: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle took a bath of Janaba,
     he washed his hands first. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 263: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet and I used to take a bath from a
     single pot of water after Janaba. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 264: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     the Prophet and one of his wives used to take a
     bath from a single pot of water. (Shu'ba added to
     Anas's Statement "After the Janaba") 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 265: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     I placed water for the bath of Allah's Apostle
     and he poured water over his hands and washed
     them twice or thrice; then he poured water with
     his right hand over his left and washed his private
     parts (with his left hand). He rubbed his hand
     over the earth and rinsed his mouth and washed
     his nose by putting water in it and blowing it out.
     After that he washed his face, both fore arms and
     head thrice and then poured water over his body.
     He withdrew from that place and washed his
     feet. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 266: 

     Narrated Maimuna bint Al-Harith: 

     I placed water for the bath of Allah's Apostle
     and put a screen. He poured water over his
     hands, and washed them once or twice. (The
     subnarrator added that he did not remember if
     she had said thrice or not). Then he poured
     water with his right hand over his left one and
     washed his private parts. He rubbed his hand
     over the earth or the wall and washed it. He
     rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting
     water in it and blowing it out. He washed his
     face, forearms and head. He poured water over
     his body and then withdrew from that place and
     washed his feet. I presented him a piece of cloth
     (towel) and he pointed with his hand (that he
     does not want it) and did not take it. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 267: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Muntathir: 

     on the authority of his father that he had asked
     'Aisha (about the Hadith of Ibn 'Umar). She said,
     "May Allah be Merciful to Abu 'Abdur-Rahman.
     I used to put scent on Allah's Apostle and he
     used to go round his wives, and in the morning he
     assumed the Ihram, and the fragrance of scent
     was still coming out from his body." 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 268: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     Anas bin Malik said, "The Prophet used to visit
     all his wives in a round, during the day and night
     and they were eleven in number." I asked Anas,
     "Had the Prophet the strength for it?" Anas
     replied, "We used to say that the Prophet was
     given the strength of thirty (men)." And Sa'id said
     on the authority of Qatada that Anas had told
     him about nine wives only (not eleven). 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 269: 

     Narrated 'Ali: 

     I used to get emotional urethral discharge
     frequently. Being the son-in-law of the Prophet I
     requested a man to ask him about it. So the man
     asked the Prophet about it. The Prophet replied,
     "Perform ablution after washing your organ
     (penis)." 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 270: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Muntathir: 

     on the authority of his father that he had asked
     'Aisha about the saying of Ibn 'Umar(i.e. he did
     not like to be a Muhrim while the smell of scent
     was still coming from his body). 'Aisha said, "I
     scented Allah's Apostle and he went round (had
     sexual intercourse with) all his wives, and in the
     morning he was Muhrim (after taking a bath)." 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 271: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     It is as if I am just looking at the glitter of scent in
     the parting of the Prophet's head hair while he
     was a Muhrim. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 272: 

     Narrated Hisham bin 'Urwa: 

     (on the authority of his father) 'Aisha said,
     "Whenever Allah's Apostle took the bath of
     Janaba, he cleaned his hands and performed
     ablution like that for prayer and then took a bath
     and rubbed his hair, till he felt that the whole skin
     of the head had become wet, then he would pour
     water thrice and wash the rest of the body."
     'Aisha further said, "I and Allah's Apostle used to
     take a bath from a single water container, from
     which we took water simultaneously." 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 273: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     Water was placed for the ablution of Allah's
     Apostle after Janaba. He poured water with his
     right hand over his left twice or thrice and then
     washed his private parts and rubbed his hand on
     the earth or on a wall twice or thrice and then
     rinsed his mouth, washed his nose by putting
     water in it and then blowing it out arid then
     washed his face and forearms and poured water
     over his head and washed his body. Then he
     shifted from that place and washed his feet. I
     brought a piece of cloth, but he did not take it
     and removed the traces of water from his body
     with his hand." 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 274: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Once the call (Iqama) for the prayer was
     announced and the rows were straightened.
     Allah's Apostle came out; and when he stood up
     at his Musalla, he remembered that he was
     Junub. Then he ordered us to stay at our places
     and went to take a bath and then returned with
     water dropping from his head. He said,
     "Allahu-Akbar", and we all offered the prayer
     with him. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 275: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     I placed water for the bath of the Prophet and
     screened him with a garment. He poured water
     over his hands and washed them. After that he
     poured water with his right hand over his left and
     washed his private parts, rubbed his hands with
     earth and washed them, rinsed his mouth,
     washed his nose by putting water in it and then
     blowing it out and then washed his face and
     forearms. He poured water over his head and
     body. He then shifted from that place and
     washed his feet. I gave him a piece of cloth but
     he did not take it and came out removing the
     water (from his body) with both his hands. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 276: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Whenever any one of us was Junub, she poured
     water over her head thrice with both her hands
     and then rubbed the right side of her head with
     one hand and rubbed the left side of the head
     with the other hand. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 277: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, 'The (people of) Bani Israel
     used to take bath naked (all together) looking at
     each other. The Prophet Moses used to take a
     bath alone. They said, 'By Allah! Nothing
     prevents Moses from taking a bath with us
     except that he has a scrotal hernia.' So once
     Moses went out to take a bath and put his
     clothes over a stone and then that stone ran away
     with his clothes. Moses followed that stone
     saying, "My clothes, O stone! My clothes, O
     stone! till the people of Bani Israel saw him and
     said, 'By Allah, Moses has got no defect in his
     body. Moses took his clothes and began to beat
     the stone." Abu Huraira added, "By Allah! There
     are still six or seven marks present on the stone
     from that excessive beating." 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "When
     the Prophet Job (Aiyub) was taking a bath
     naked, golden locusts began to fall on him. Job
     started collecting them in his clothes. His Lord
     addressed him, 'O Job! Haven't I given you
     enough so that you are not in need of them.' Job
     replied, 'Yes!' By Your Honor (power)! But I
     cannot dispense with Your Blessings.' " 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 278: 

     Narrated Um Hani bint Abi Talib: 

     I went to Allah's Apostle in the year of the
     conquest of Mecca and found him taking a bath
     while Fatima was screening him. The Prophet
     asked, "Who is it?" I replied, "I am Um-Hani." 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 279: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     I screened the Prophet while he was taking a
     bath of Janaba. He washed his hands, poured
     water from his right hand over his left and
     washed his private parts. Then he rubbed his
     hand over a wall or the earth, and performed
     ablution similar to that for the prayer but did not
     wash his feet. Then he poured water over his
     body, shifted from that place, and washed his
     feet. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 280: 

     Narrated Um-Salama: 

     (the mother of the believers) Um Sulaim, the wife
     of Abu Talha, came to Allah's Apostle and said,
     "O Allah's Apostle! Verily Allah is not shy of
     (telling you) the truth. Is it necessary for a woman
     to take a bath after she has a wet dream
     (nocturnal sexual discharge)?" Allah's Apostle
     replied, "Yes, if she notices a discharge." 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 281: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet came across me in one of the
     streets of Medina and at that time I was Junub.
     So I slipped away from him and went to take a
     bath. On my return the Prophet said, "O Abu
     Huraira! Where have you been?" I replied, "I
     was Junub, so I disliked to sit in your company."
     The Prophet said, "Subhan Allah! A believer
     never becomes impure." 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 282: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet used to visit all his wives in one
     night and he had nine wives at that time. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 283: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle came across me and I was Junub
     He took my hand and I went along with him till
     he sat down I slipped away, went home and
     took a bath. When I came back. he was still
     sitting there. He then said to me, "O AbuHuraira!
     Where have you been?' I told him about it The
     Prophet said, "Subhan Allah! O Abu Huraira! A
     believer never becomes impure." 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 284: 

     Narrated Abu Salama : 

     I asked 'Aisha "Did the Prophet use to sleep
     while he was Junub?" She replied, "Yes, but he
     used to perform ablution (before going to bed). 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 285: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: 

     I asked Allah's Apostle "Can any one of us sleep
     while he is Junub?" He replied, "Yes, if he
     performs ablution, he can sleep while he is
     Junub." 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 286: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever the Prophet intended to sleep while he
     was Junub, he used to wash his private parts and
     perform ablution like that for the prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 287: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     'Umar asked the Prophet "Can anyone of us
     sleep while he is Junub?" He replied, "Yes, if he
     performs ablution." 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 288: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Umar bin Al-Khattab told Allah's Apostle, "I
     became Junub at night." Allah's Apostle replied,
     "Perform ablution after washing your private
     parts and then sleep." 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 289: 

     Narrated Hisham: 

     as the following Hadith 290. 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 290: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "When a man sits in between
     the four parts of a woman and did the sexual
     intercourse with her, bath becomes compulsory."


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 291: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid AjJuhani: 

     I asked 'Uthman bin 'Affan about a man who
     engaged in the sexual intercourse with his wife
     but did not discharge. 'Uthman replied, "He
     should perform ablution like that for the prayer
     after washing his private parts." 'Uthman added,
     "I heard that from Allah's Apostle." I asked 'Ali
     bin Abi Talib, Az-Zubair bin Al-'Awwam, Talha
     bin 'Ubaidullah and Ubai bin Ka'b and a gave the
     same reply. (Abu Aiylub said that he had heard
     that from Allah's Apostle ) (This order was
     cancelled later on so one has to take a bath. See,
     Hadith No. 180). 


Volume 1, Book 5, Number 292: 

     Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b: 

     I asked Allah's Apostle about a man who
     engages in sexual intercourse with his wife but
     does not discharge. He replied, "He should wash
     the parts which comes in contact with the private
     parts of the woman, perform ablution and then
     pray." (Abu 'Abdullah said, "Taking a bath is
     safer and is the last order.") 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 6: 

        Menstrual Periods 



Volume 1, Book 6, Number 293: 

     Narrated Al-Qasim: 

     'Aisha said, "We set out with the sole intention of
     performing Hajj and when we reached Sarif, (a
     place six miles from Mecca) I got my menses.
     Allah's Apostle came to me while I was weeping.
     He said 'What is the matter with you? Have you
     got your menses?' I replied, 'Yes.' He said, 'This
     is a thing which Allah has ordained for the
     daughters of Adam. So do what all the pilgrims
     do with the exception of the Taw-af
     (Circumambulation) round the Ka'ba." 'Aisha
     added, "Allah's Apostle sacrificed cows on
     behalf of his wives." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 294: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     While in menses, I used to comb the hair of
     Allah's Apostle . 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 295: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     A person asked me, "Can a woman in menses
     serve me? And can a Junub woman come close
     to me?" I replied, "All this is easy for me. All of
     them can serve me, and there is no harm for any
     other person to do the same. 'Aisha told me that
     she used to comb the hair of Allah's Apostle
     while she was in her menses, and he was in Itikaf
     (in the mosque). He would bring his head near
     her in her room and she would comb his hair,
     while she used to be in her menses." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 296: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to lean on my lap and recite
     Qur'an while I was in menses. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 297: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     While I was laying with the Prophet under a
     single woolen sheet, I got the menses. I slipped
     away and put on the clothes for menses. He said,
     "Have you got "Nifas" (menses)?" I replied,
     "Yes." He then called me and made me lie with
     him under the same sheet. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 298: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet and I used to take a bath from a
     single pot while we were Junub. During the
     menses, he used to order me to put on an Izar
     (dress worn below the waist) and used to fondle
     me. While in Itikaf, he used to bring his head
     near me and I would wash it while I used to be in
     my periods (menses). 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 299: 

     Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Aswad: 

     (on the authority of his father) 'Aisha said:
     "Whenever Allah's Apostle wanted to fondle
     anyone of us during her periods (menses), he
     used to order her to put on an Izar and start
     fondling her." 'Aisha added, "None of you could
     control his sexual desires as the Prophet could." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 300: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     When ever Allah's Apostle wanted to fondle any
     of his wives during the periods (menses), he used
     to ask her to wear an Izar. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 301: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Once Allah's Apostle went out to the Musalla (to
     offer the prayer) o 'Id-al-Adha or Al-Fitr prayer.
     Then he passed by the women and said, "O
     women! Give alms, as I have seen that the
     majority of the dwellers of Hell-fire were you
     (women)." They asked, "Why is it so, O Allah's
     Apostle ?" He replied, "You curse frequently and
     are ungrateful to your husbands. I have not seen
     anyone more deficient in intelligence and religion
     than you. A cautious sensible man could be led
     astray by some of you." The women asked, "O
     Allah's Apostle! What is deficient in our
     intelligence and religion?" He said, "Is not the
     evidence of two women equal to the witness of
     one man?" They replied in the affirmative. He
     said, "This is the deficiency in her intelligence.
     Isn't it true that a woman can neither pray nor
     fast during her menses?" The women replied in
     the affirmative. He said, "This is the deficiency in
     her religion." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 302: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     We set out with the Prophet for Hajj and when
     we reached Sarif I got my menses. When the
     Prophet came to me, I was weeping. He asked,
     "Why are you weeping?" I said, "I wish if I had
     not performed Hajj this year." He asked, "May
     be that you got your menses?" I replied, "Yes."
     He then said, "This is the thing which Allah has
     ordained for all the daughters of Adam. So do
     what all the pilgrims do except that you do not
     perform the Tawaf round the Ka'ba till you are
     clean." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 303: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Fatima bint Abi Hubaish said to Allah's Apostle,
     "O Allah's Apostle! I do not become clean (from
     bleeding). Shall I give up my prayers?" Allah's
     Apostle replied: "No, because it is from a blood
     vessel and not the menses. So when the real
     menses begins give up your prayers and when it
     (the period) has finished wash the blood off your
     body (take a bath) and offer your prayers." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 304: 

     Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr: 

     A woman asked Allah's Apostle, "O Allah's
     Apostle! What should we do, if the blood of
     menses falls on our clothes?" Allah's Apostle
     replied, "If the blood of menses falls on the
     garment of anyone of you, she must take hold of
     the blood spot, rub it, and wash it with water and
     then pray in (with it)." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 305: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever anyone of us got her menses, she, on
     becoming clean, used to take hold of the blood
     spot and rub the blood off her garment, and pour
     water over it and wash that portion thoroughly
     and sprinkle water over the rest of the garment.
     After that she would pray in (with) it. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 306: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Once one of the wives of the Prophet did Itikaf
     along with him and she was getting bleeding in
     between her periods. She used to see the blood
     (from her private parts) and she would perhaps
     put a dish under her for the blood. (The
     sub-narrator 'Ikrima added, 'Aisha once saw the
     liquid of safflower and said, "It looks like what so
     and so used to have.") 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 307: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     "One of the wives of Allah's Apostle joined him
     in l'tikaf and she noticed blood and yellowish
     discharge (from her private parts) and put a dish
     under her when she prayed." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 308: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     One of the mothers of the faithful believers (i.e.
     the wives of the Prophet ) did l'tikaf while she
     was having bleeding in between her periods. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 309: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     None of us had more than a single garment and
     we used to have our menses while wearing it.
     Whenever it got soiled with blood of menses we
     used to apply saliva to the blood spot and rub off
     the blood with our nails. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 310: 

     Narrated Um-'Atiya: 

     We were forbidden to mourn for a dead person
     for more than three days except in the case of a
     husband for whom mourning was allowed for
     four months and ten days. (During that time) we
     were not allowed to put ko,hl (Antimony eye
     power) in our eyes or to use perfumes or to put
     on colored clothes except a dress made of 'Asb
     (a kind of Yemen cloth, very coarse and rough).
     We were allowed very light perfumes at the time
     of taking a bath after menses and also we were
     forbidden to go with the funeral procession . 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 311: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     A woman asked the Prophet about the bath
     which is take after finishing from the menses. The
     Prophet told her what to do and said, "Purify
     yourself with a piece of cloth scented with musk."
     The woman asked, "How shall I purify myself
     with it" He said, "Subhan Allah! Purify yourself
     (with it)." I pulled her to myself and said, "Rub
     the place soiled with blood with it." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 312: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     An Ansari woman asked the Prophet how to
     take a bath after finishing from the menses. He
     replied, "Take a piece a cloth perfumed with
     musk and clean the private parts with it thrice."
     The Prophet felt shy and turned his face. So
     pulled her to me and told her what the Prophet
     meant. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 313: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     In the last Hajj of Allah's Apostle I assume the
     Ihram for Hajj along with Allah Apostle. I was
     one of those who intended Tamattu' (to perform
     Hajj an 'Umra) and did not take the Hadi (animal
     for sacrifice) with me. I got my menses and was
     not clean till the night of 'Arafa I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! It is the night of the day of 'Arafat and I
     intended to perform the Hajj Tamattu' with
     'Umra Allah's Apostle told me to undo my hair
     and comb it and to postpone the 'Umra. I did the
     same and completed the Hajj. On the night of
     Al-Hasba (i.e. place outside Mecca where the
     pilgrims go after finishing all the ceremonies Hajj
     at Mina) he (the Prophet ordered 'Abdur
     Rahman ('Aisha's brother) to take me to
     At-Tan'im to assume the lhram for'Umra in lieu of
     that of Hajj-atTamattu' which I had intended to
     perform. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 314: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     On the 1st of Dhul-Hijja we set out with the
     intention of performing Hajj. Allah's Apostle said,
     "Any one who likes to assume the Ihram for
     'Umra he can do so. Had I not brought the Hadi
     with me, I would have assumed the Ihram for
     'Umra. "Some of us assumed the Ihram for
     'Umra while the others assumed the Ihram for
     Hajj. I was one of those who assumed the Ihram
     for 'Umra. I got menses and kept on
     menstruating until the day of 'Arafat and
     complained of that to the Prophet . He told me to
     postpone my 'Umra, undo and comb my hair,
     and to assure the Ihram of Hajj and I did so. On
     the right of Hasba, he sent my brother
     'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr with me to
     At-Tah'im, where I assumed the Ihram for'Umra
     in lieu of the previous one. Hisham said, "For that
     ('Umra) no Hadi, fasting or alms were required. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 315: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "At every womb Allah
     appoints an angel who says, 'O Lord! A drop of
     semen, O Lord! A clot. O Lord! A little lump of
     flesh." Then if Allah wishes (to complete) its
     creation, the angel asks, (O Lord!) Will it be a
     male or female, a wretched or a blessed, and
     how much will his provision be? And what will
     his age be?' So all that is written while the child is
     still in the mother's womb." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 316: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     'Aisha said, "We set out with the Prophet in his
     last Hajj. Some of us intended to perform 'Umra
     while others Hajj. When we reached Mecca,
     Allah's Apostle said, 'Those who had assumed
     the lhram for'Umra and had not brought the Hadi
     should finish his lhram and whoever had assumed
     the Ihram for 'Umra and brought the Hadi should
     not finish the Ihram till he has slaughtered his
     Hadi and whoever had assumed the lhram for
     Hajj should complete his Hajj." 'Aisha further
     said, "I got my periods (menses) and kept on
     menstruating till the day of 'Arafat, and I had
     assumed the Ihram for 'Umra only (Tamattu').
     The Prophet ordered me to undo and comb my
     head hair and assume the lhram for Hajj only and
     leave the 'Umra. I did the same till I completed
     the Hajj. Then the Prophet sent 'Abdur Rahman
     bin Abi Bakr with me and ordered me to
     perform 'Umra from At-Tan'im in lieu of the
     missed 'Umra." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 317: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Fatima bint Abi Hubaish used to have bleeding in
     between the periods, so she asked the Prophet
     about it . He replied, "The bleeding is from a
     blood vessel and not the menses. So give up the
     prayers when the (real) menses begin and when it
     has finished, take a bath and start praying." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 318: 

     Narrated Mu'adha: 

     A woman asked 'Aisha, "Should I offer the
     prayers that which I did not offer because of
     menses" 'Aisha said, "Are you from the Huraura'
     (a town in Iraq?) We were with the Prophet and
     used to get our periods but he never ordered us
     to offer them (the Prayers missed during
     menses)." 'Aisha perhaps said, "We did not offer
     them." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 319: 

     Narrated Zainab bint Abi Salama: 

     Um-Salama said, "I got my menses while I was
     lying with the Prophet under a woolen sheet. So I
     slipped away, took the clothes for menses and
     put them on. Allah's Apostle said, 'Have you got
     your menses?' I replied, 'Yes.' Then he called me
     and took me with him under the woolen sheet."
     Um Salama further said, "The Prophet used to
     kiss me while he was fasting. The Prophet and I
     used to take the bath of Janaba from a single
     pot." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 320: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     While I was lying with the Prophet under a
     woolen sheet, I got my menses. I slipped away
     and put on the clothes for menses. The Prophet
     said, "Have you got your menses?" I replied,
     "Yes." He called me and I slept with him under
     the woolen sheet. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 321: 

     Narrated Aiyub: 

     Hafsa said, 'We used to forbid our young women
     to go out for the two 'Id prayers. A woman came
     and stayed at the palace of Bani Khalaf and she
     narrated about her sister whose husband took
     part in twelve holy battles along with the Prophet
     and her sister was with her husband in six (out of
     these twelve). She (the woman's sister) said,
     "We used to treat the wounded, look after the
     patients and once I asked the Prophet, 'Is there
     any harm for any of us to stay at home if she
     doesn't have a veil?' He said, 'She should cover
     herself with the veil of her companion and should
     participate in the good deeds and in the religious
     gathering of the Muslims.' When Um 'Atiya came
     I asked her whether she had heard it from the
     Prophet. She replied, "Yes. May my father be
     sacrificed for him (the Prophet)! (Whenever she
     mentioned the Prophet she used to say, 'May my
     father be sacrificed for him) I have heard the
     Prophet saying, 'The unmarried young virgins and
     the mature girl who stay often screened or the
     young unmarried virgins who often stay screened
     and the menstruating women should come out
     and participate in the good deeds as well as the
     religious gathering of the faithful believers but the
     menstruating women should keep away from the
     Musalla (praying place).' " Hafsa asked Um
     'Atiya surprisingly, "Do you say the menstruating
     women?" She replied, "Doesn't a menstruating
     woman attend 'Arafat (Hajj) and such and such
     (other deeds)?" 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 322: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Fatima bint Abi Hubaish asked the Prophet, "I
     got persistent bleeding (in between the periods)
     and do not become clean. Shall I give up
     prayers?" He replied, "No, this is from a blood
     vessel. Give up the prayers only for the days on
     which you usually get the menses and then take a
     bath and offer your prayers." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 323: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiya: 

     We never considered yellowish discharge as a
     thing of importance (as menses). 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 324: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Um Habiba got
     bleeding in between the periods for seven years.
     She asked Allah's Apostle about it. He ordered
     her to take a bath (after the termination of actual
     periods) and added that it was (from) a blood
     vessel. So she used to take a bath for every
     prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 325: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) I told Allah's Apostle
     that Safiya bint Huyai had got her menses. He
     said, "She will probably delay us. Did she
     perform Tawaf (Al-Ifada) with you?" We
     replied, "Yes." On that the Prophet told her to
     depart. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 326: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     A woman is al lowed to leave (go back home) if
     she gets menses (after Tawaf-AlIfada). Ibn
     'Umar formerly used to say that she should not
     leave but later on I heard him saying, "She may
     leave, since Allah's Apostle gave them the
     permission to leave (after Tawaf-AlIfada." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 327: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said to me, "Give up the prayer
     when your menses begin and when it has
     finished, wash the blood off your body (take a
     bath) and start praying." 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 328: 

     Narrated Samura bin Jundab: 

     The Prophet offered the funeral prayer for the
     dead body of a woman who died of (during)
     delivery (i.e. child birth) and he stood by the
     middle of her body. 


Volume 1, Book 6, Number 329: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) During my menses, I
     never prayed, but used to sit on the mat beside
     the mosque of Allah's Apostle. He used to offer
     the prayer on his sheet and in prostration some of
     his clothes used to touch me." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 7: 

    Rubbing hands and feet
    with dust (Tayammum) 



Volume 1, Book 7, Number 330: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) We set out with Allahs
     Apostle on one of his journeys till we reached
     Al-Baida' or Dhatul-Jaish, a necklace of mine
     was broken (and lost). Allah's Apostle stayed
     there to search for it, and so did the people along
     with him. There was no water at that place, so
     the people went to Abu- Bakr As-Siddiq and
     said, "Don't you see what 'Aisha has done? She
     has made Allah's Apostle and the people stay
     where there is no water and they have no water
     with them." Abu Bakr came while Allah's
     Apostle was sleeping with his head on my thigh,
     He said, to me: "You have detained Allah's
     Apostle and the people where there is no water
     and they have no water with them. 

     So he admonished me and said what Allah
     wished him to say and hit me on my flank with his
     hand. Nothing prevented me from moving
     (because of pain) but the position of Allah's
     Apostle on my thigh. Allah's Apostle got up
     when dawn broke and there was no water. So
     Allah revealed the Divine Verses of Tayammum.
     So they all performed Tayammum. Usaid bin
     Hudair said, "O the family of Abu Bakr! This is
     not the first blessing of yours." Then the camel on
     which I was riding was caused to move from its
     place and the necklace was found beneath it. 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 331: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "I have been given five things
     which were not given to any one else before me. 

     1. Allah made me victorious by awe, (by His
     frightening my enemies) for a distance of one
     month's journey. 

     2. The earth has been made for me (and for my
     followers) a place for praying and a thing to
     perform Tayammum, therefore anyone of my
     followers can pray wherever the time of a prayer
     is due. 

     3. The booty has been made Halal (lawful) for
     me yet it was not lawful for anyone else before
     me. 

     4. I have been given the right of intercession (on
     the Day of Resurrection). 

     5. Every Prophet used to be sent to his nation
     only but I have been sent to all mankind. 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 332: 

     Narrated 'Urwa's father: 

     Aisha said, "I borrowed a necklace from Asma'
     and it was lost. So Allah's Apostle sent a man to
     search for it and he found it. Then the time of the
     prayer became due and there was no water.
     They prayed (without ablution) and informed
     Allah's Apostle about it, so the verse of
     Tayammum was revealed." Usaid bin Hudair said
     to 'Aisha, "May Allah reward you. By Allah,
     whenever anything happened which you did not
     like, Allah brought good for you and for the
     Muslims in that." 

     Al-Jurf and the time for the 'Asr prayer became
     due while he was at Marbad-AnNa'am
     (sheep-fold), so he (performed Tayammum) and
     prayed there and then entered Medina when the
     sun was still high but he did not repeat that
     prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 333: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaim Al-Ansari: 

     The Prophet came from the direction of Bir
     Jamal. A man met him and greeted him. But he
     did not return back the greeting till he went to a
     (mud) wall and smeared his hands and his face
     with its dust (performed Tayammum) and then
     returned back the greeting. 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 334: 

     Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza: 

     A man came to 'Umar bin Al-Khattab and said,
     "I became Junub but no water was available."
     'Ammar bin Yasir said to 'Umar, "Do you
     remember that you and I (became Junub while
     both of us) were together on a journey and you
     didn't pray but I rolled myself on the ground and
     prayed? I informed the Prophet about it and he
     said, 'It would have been sufficient for you to do
     like this.' The Prophet then stroked lightly the
     earth with his hands and then blew off the dust
     and passed his hands over his face and hands." 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 335: 

     Narrated Said bin 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza: 

     (on the authority of his father who said) 'Ammar
     said so (the above Statement). And Shu'ba
     stroked lightly the earth with his hands and
     brought them close to his mouth (blew off the
     dust) and passed them over his face and then the
     backs of his hands. 'Ammar said, "Ablution
     (meaning Tayammum here) is sufficient for a
     Muslim if water is not available." 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 336: 

     Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza: 

     that while he was in the company of 'Umar,
     'Ammar said to 'Umar, "We were in a
     detachment and became Junub and I blew the
     dust off my hands (performed the rolling over the
     earth and prayed.)" 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 337: 

     Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza: 

     'Ammar said to 'Umar "I rolled myself in the dust
     and came to the Prophet who said, 'Passing
     dusted hands over the face and the backs of the
     hands is sufficient for you.' " 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 338: 

     Narrated 'Ammar: 

     as above. 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 339: 

     Narrated 'Ammar: 

     The Prophet stroked the earth with his hands and
     then passed them over his face and the backs of
     his hands (while demonstrating Tayammum). 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 340: 

     Narrated 'Imran: 

     Once we were traveling with the Prophet and we
     carried on traveling till the last part of the night
     and then we (halted at a place) and slept
     (deeply). There is nothing sweeter than sleep for
     a traveler in the last part of the night. So it was
     only the heat of the sun that made us to wake up
     and the first to wake up was so and so, then so
     and so and then so and so (the narrator 'Auf said
     that Abu Raja' had told him their names but he
     had forgotten them) and the fourth person to
     wake up was 'Umar bin Al-Khattab. And
     whenever the Prophet used to sleep, nobody
     would wake up him till he himself used to get up
     as we did not know what was happening (being
     revealed) to him in his sleep. So, 'Umar got up
     and saw the condition of the people, and he was
     a strict man, so he said, "Allahu Akbar" and
     raised his voice with Takbir, and kept on saying
     loudly till the Prophet got up because of it. When
     he got up, the people informed him about what
     had happened to them. He said, "There is no
     harm (or it will not be harmful). Depart!" So they
     departed from that place, and after covering
     some distance the Prophet stopped and asked
     for some water to perform the ablution. So he
     performed the ablution and the call for the prayer
     was pronounced and he led the people in prayer.
     After he finished from the prayer, he saw a man
     sitting aloof who had not prayed with the people.
     He asked, "O so and so! What has prevented
     you from praying with us?" He replied, "I am
     Junub and there is no water. " The Prophet said,
     "Perform Tayammum with (clean) earth and that
     is sufficient for you." 

     Then the Prophet proceeded on and the people
     complained to him of thirst. Thereupon he got
     down and called a person (the narrator 'Auf
     added that Abu Raja' had named him but he had
     forgotten) and 'Ali, and ordered them to go and
     bring water. So they went in search of water and
     met a woman who was sitting on her camel
     between two bags of water. They asked, "Where
     can we find water?" She replied, "I was there (at
     the place of water) this hour yesterday and my
     people are behind me." They requested her to
     accompany them. She asked, "Where?" They
     said, "To Allah's Apostle ." She said, "Do you
     mean the man who is called the Sabi, (with a new
     religion)?" They replied, "Yes, the same person.
     So come along." They brought her to the Prophet
     and narrated the whole story. He said, "Help her
     to dismount." The Prophet asked for a pot, then
     he opened the mouths of the bags and poured
     some water into the pot. Then he closed the big
     openings of the bags and opened the small ones
     and the people were called upon to drink and
     water their animals. So they all watered their
     animals and they (too) all quenched their thirst
     and also gave water to others and last of all the
     Prophet gave a pot full of water to the person
     who was Junub and told him to pour it over his
     body. The woman was standing and watching all
     that which they were doing with her water. By
     Allah, when her water bags were returned the
     looked like as if they were more full (of water)
     than they had been before (Miracle of Allah's
     Apostle) Then the Prophet ordered us to collect
     something for her; so dates, flour and Sawiq
     were collected which amounted to a good meal
     that was put in a piece of cloth. She was helped
     to ride on her camel and that cloth full of
     food-stuff was also placed in front of her and
     then the Prophet said to her, "We have not taken
     your water but Allah has given water to us." She
     returned home late. Her relatives asked her: "O
     so and so what has delayed you?" She said, "A
     strange thing! Two men met me and took me to
     the man who is called the Sabi' and he did such
     and such a thing. By Allah, he is either the
     greatest magician between this and this (gesturing
     with her index and middle fingers raising them
     towards the sky indicating the heaven and the
     earth) or he is Allah's true Apostle." 

     Afterwards the Muslims used to attack the
     pagans around her abode but never touched her
     village. One day she said to her people, "I think
     that these people leave you purposely. Have you
     got any inclination to Islam?" They obeyed her
     and all of them embraced Islam. 

     Abu 'Abdultah said: The word Saba'a means
     "The one who has deserted his old religion and
     embraced a new religion." Abul 'Ailya said, "The
     Sabis are a sect of people of the Scripture who
     recite the Book of Psalms." 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 341: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     Abu Muisa said to'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, "If one
     does not find water (for ablution) can he give up
     the prayer?" Abdullah replied, "If you give the
     permission to perform Tayammum they will
     perform Tayammum even if water was available
     if one of them found it cold." Abu Musa said,
     "What about the statement of 'Ammar to 'Umar?"
     'Abdullah replied, "Umar was not satisfied by his
     statement." 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 342: 

     Narrated Shaqiq bin Salama: 

     I was with 'Abdullah and Abu Musa; the latter
     asked the former, "O Abu AbdurRahman! What
     is your opinion if somebody becomes Junub and
     no water is available?" 'Abdullah replied, "Do not
     pray till water is found." Abu Musa said, "What
     do you say about the statement of 'Ammar (who
     was ordered by the Prophet to perform
     Tayammum). The Prophet said to him: "Perform
     Tayammum and that would be sufficient."
     'Abdullah replied, "Don't you see that 'Umar was
     not satisfied by 'Ammar's statement?" Abu-
     Musa said, "All right, leave 'Ammalr's statement,
     but what will you say about this verse (of
     Tayammum)?" 'Abqiullah kept quiet and then
     said, "If we allowed it, then they would probably
     perform Tayammum even if water was available,
     if one of them found it (water) cold." The
     narrator added, "I said to Shaqrq, "Then did
     'Abdullah dislike to perform Tayammum because
     of this?" He replied, "Yes." 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 343: 

     Narrated Al-A'mash: 

     Shaqiq said, "While I was sitting with 'Abdullah
     and Abu Musa Al-Ash-'ari, the latter asked the
     former, 'If a person becomes Junub and does not
     find water for one month, can he perform
     Tayammum and offer his prayer?' (He applied in
     the negative). Abu Musa said, 'What do you say
     about this verse from Surat "Al-Ma'ida": When
     you do not find water then perform Tayammum
     with clean earth? 'Abdullah replied, 'If we
     allowed it then they would probably perform
     Tayammum with clean earth even if water were
     available but cold.' I said to Shaqiq, 'You then
     disliked to perform Tayammum because of this?'
     Shaqiq said,'Yes.' (Shaqiq added), "Abu Musa
     said, 'Haven't you heard the statement of 'Ammar
     to 'Umar? He said: I was sent out by Allah's
     Apostle for some job and I became Junub and
     could not find water so I rolled myself over the
     dust (clean earth) like an animal does, and when
     I told the Prophet of that he said, 'Like this
     would have been sufficient.' The Prophet (saying
     so) lightly stroked the earth with his hand once
     and blew it off, then passed his (left) hand over
     the back of his right hand or his (right) hand over
     the back of his left hand and then passed them
     over his face.' So 'Abdullah said to Abu- Musa,
     'Don't you know that 'Umar was not satisfied
     with 'Ammar's statement?' " 

     Narrated Shaqiq: While I was with 'Abdullah and
     Abu Musa, the latter said to the former, "Haven't
     you heard the statement of 'Ammar to 'Umar?
     He said, "Allah's Apostle sent you and me out
     and I became Junub and rolled myself in the dust
     (clean earth) (for Tayammum). When we came
     to Allah's Apostle I told him about it and he said,
     'This would have been sufficient,' passing his
     hands over his face and the backs of his hands
     once only.' " 


Volume 1, Book 7, Number 344: 

     Narrated 'Imran bin Husain Al-Khuza'i: 

     Allah's Apostle saw a person sitting aloof and not
     praying with the people. He asked him, "O so
     and so! What prevented you from offering the
     prayer with the people?" He replied, "O Allah's
     Apostle! I am Junub and there is no water." The
     Prophet said, "Perform Tayammum with clean
     earth and that will be sufficient for you." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 8: 

           Prayers (Salat) 



Volume 1, Book 8, Number 345: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "While I was at Mecca the
     roof of my house was opened and Gabriel
     descended, opened my chest, and washed it with
     Zam-zam water. Then he brought a golden tray
     full of wisdom and faith and having poured its
     contents into my chest, he closed it. Then he
     took my hand and ascended with me to the
     nearest heaven, when I reached the nearest
     heaven, Gabriel said to the gatekeeper of the
     heaven, 'Open (the gate).' The gatekeeper
     asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel answered: 'Gabriel.'
     He asked, 'Is there anyone with you?' Gabriel
     replied, 'Yes, Muhammad I is with me.' He
     asked, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel said, 'Yes.'
     So the gate was opened and we went over the
     nearest heaven and there we saw a man sitting
     with some people on his right and some on his
     left. When he looked towards his right, he
     laughed and when he looked toward his left he
     wept. Then he said, 'Welcome! O pious Prophet
     and pious son.' I asked Gabriel, 'Who is he?' He
     replied, 'He is Adam and the people on his right
     and left are the souls of his offspring. Those on
     his right are the people of Paradise and those on
     his left are the people of Hell and when he looks
     towards his right he laughs and when he looks
     towards his left he weeps.' 

     Then he ascended with me till he reached the
     second heaven and he (Gabriel) said to its
     gatekeeper, 'Open (the gate).' The gatekeeper
     said to him the same as the gatekeeper of the first
     heaven had said and he opened the gate. Anas
     said: "Abu Dhar added that the Prophet met
     Adam, Idris, Moses, Jesus and Abraham, he
     (Abu Dhar) did not mention on which heaven
     they were but he mentioned that he (the Prophet
     ) met Adarn on the nearest heaven and Abraham
     on the sixth heaven. Anas said, "When Gabriel
     along with the Prophet passed by Idris, the latter
     said, 'Welcome! O pious Prophet and pious
     brother.' The Prophet asked, 'Who is he?'
     Gabriel replied, 'He is Idris." The Prophet added,
     "I passed by Moses and he said, 'Welcome! O
     pious Prophet and pious brother.' I asked
     Gabriel, 'Who is he?' Gabriel replied, 'He is
     Moses.' Then I passed by Jesus and he said,
     'Welcome! O pious brother and pious Prophet.' I
     asked, 'Who is he?' Gabriel replied, 'He is Jesus.

     Then I passed by Abraham and he said,
     'Welcome! O pious Prophet and pious son.' I
     asked Gabriel, 'Who is he?' Gabriel replied, 'He
     is Abraham. The Prophet added, 'Then Gabriel
     ascended with me to a place where I heard the
     creaking of the pens." Ibn Hazm and Anas bin
     Malik said: The Prophet said, "Then Allah
     enjoined fifty prayers on my followers when I
     returned with this order of Allah, I passed by
     Moses who asked me, 'What has Allah enjoined
     on your followers?' I replied, 'He has enjoined
     fifty prayers on them.' Moses said, 'Go back to
     your Lord (and appeal for reduction) for your
     followers will not be able to bear it.' (So I went
     back to Allah and requested for reduction) and
     He reduced it to half. When I passed by Moses
     again and informed him about it, he said, 'Go
     back to your Lord as your followers will not be
     able to bear it.' So I returned to Allah and
     requested for further reduction and half of it was
     reduced. I again passed by Moses and he said to
     me: 'Return to your Lord, for your followers will
     not be able to bear it. So I returned to Allah and
     He said, 'These are five prayers and they are all
     (equal to) fifty (in reward) for My Word does
     not change.' I returned to Moses and he told me
     to go back once again. I replied, 'Now I feel shy
     of asking my Lord again.' Then Gabriel took me
     till we '' reached Sidrat-il-Muntaha (Lote tree of;
     the utmost boundry) which was shrouded in
     colors, indescribable. Then I was admitted into
     Paradise where I found small (tents or) walls
     (made) of pearls and its earth was of musk." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 346: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     the mother of believers: Allah enjoined the prayer
     when He enjoined it, it was two Rakat only (in
     every prayer) both when in residence or on
     journey. Then the prayers offered on journey
     remained the same, but (the Rakat of) the
     prayers for non-travellers were increased. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 347: 

     Narrated Um 'Atiya: 

     We were ordered to bring out our menstruating
     women and veiled women in the religious
     gatherings and invocation of Muslims on the two
     'Id festivals. These menstruating women were to
     keep away from their Musalla. A woman asked,
     "O Allah's Apostle ' What about one who does
     not have a veil?" He said, "Let her share the veil
     of her companion." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 348: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir: 

     Once Jabir prayed with his Izar tied to his back
     while his clothes were Lying beside him on a
     wooden peg. Somebody asked him, "Do you
     offer your prayer in a single Izar?" He replied, "I
     did so to show it to a fool like you. Had anyone
     of us two garments in the life-time of the
     Prophet?" 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 349: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Al Munkadir: 

     I saw Jabir bin 'Abdullah praying in a single
     garment and he said that he had seen the Prophet
     praying in a single garment. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 350: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Abi Salama: 

     The Prophet prayed in one garment and crossed
     its ends. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 351: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Abi Salama: 

     I saw the Prophet offering prayers in a single
     garment in the house of Um-Salama and he had
     crossed its ends around his shoulders. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 352: 

     Narrated 'Umar bin Abi Salama: 

     In the house of Um-Salama I saw Allah's
     Apostle offering prayers, wrapped in a single
     garment around his body with its ends crossed
     round his shoulders. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 353: 

     Narrated Abu Murra: 

     (the freed slave of Um Hani) Um Hani, the
     daughter of Abi Talib said, "I went to Allah's
     Apostle in the year of the conquest of Mecca
     and found him taking a bath and his daughter
     Fatima was screening him. I greeted him. He
     asked, 'Who is she?' I replied, 'I am Um Hani
     bint Abi Talib.' He said, 'Welcome! O Um Hani.'
     When he finished his bath he stood up and
     prayed eight Rak at while wearing a single
     garment wrapped round his body and when he
     finished I said, 'O Allah's Apostle ! My brother
     has told me that he will kill a person whom I gave
     shelter and that person is so and so the son of
     Hubaira.' The Prophet said, 'We shelter the
     person whom you have sheltered.' " Um Ham
     added, "And that was before noon (Duha)." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 354: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A person asked Allah's Apostle about the
     offering of the prayer in a single garment. Allah's
     Apostle replied, "Has every one of you got two
     garments?" 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 355: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "None of you should offer
     prayer in a single garment that does not cover the
     shoulders." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 356: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever prays in a single
     garment must cross its ends (over the
     shoulders)." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 357: 

     Narrated Said bin Al-Harith: 

     I asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah about praying in a
     single garment. He said, "I travelled with the
     Prophet during some of his journeys, and I came
     to him at night for some purpose and I found him
     praying. At that time, I was wearing a single
     garment with which I covered my shoulders and
     prayed by his side. When he finished the prayer,
     he asked, 'O Jabir! What has brought you here?'
     I told him what I wanted. When I finished, he
     asked, 'O Jabir! What is this garment which I
     have seen and with which you covered your
     shoulders?' I replied, 'It is a (tight) garment.' He
     said, 'If the garment is large enough, wrap it
     round the body (covering the shoulders) and if it
     is tight (too short) then use it as an Izar (tie it
     around your waist only.)' " 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 358: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     The men used to pray with the Prophet with their
     Izars tied around their necks as boys used to do;
     therefore the Prophet told the women not to raise
     their heads till the men sat down straight (while
     praying). 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 359: 

     Narrated Mughira bin Shu'ba: 

     Once I was traveling with the Prophet and he
     said, "O Mughira! take this container of water." I
     took it and Allah's Apostle went far away till he
     disappeared. He answered the call of nature and
     was wearing a Syrian cloak. He tried to take out
     his hands from its sleeve but it was very tight so
     he took out his hands from under it. I poured
     water and he performed ablution like that for
     prayers and passed his wet hands over his Khuff
     (leather socks) and then prayed . 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 360: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     While Allah's Apostle was carrying stones
     (along) with the people of Mecca for (the
     building of) the Ka'ba wearing an Izar
     (waist-sheet cover), his uncle Al-'Abbas said to
     him, "O my nephew! (It would be better) if you
     take off your Izar and put it over your shoulders
     underneath the stones." So he took off his Izar
     and put it over his shoulders, but he fell
     unconscious and since then he had never been
     seen naked. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 361: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A man stood up and asked the Prophet about
     praying in a single garment. The Prophet said,
     "Has every one of you two garments?" A man
     put a similar question to 'Umar on which he
     replied, "When Allah makes you wealthier then
     you should clothe yourself properly during
     prayers. Otherwise one can pray with an Izar
     and a Rida' (a sheet covering the upper part of
     the body.) Izar and a shirt, Izar and a Qaba',
     trousers and a Rida, trousers and a shirt or
     trousers and a Qaba', Tubban and a Qaba' or
     Tubban and a shirt." (The narrator added, "I
     think that he also said a Tubban and a Rida. ") 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 362: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     A person asked Allah's Apostle, "What should a
     Muhrim wear?" He replied, "He should not wear
     shirts, trousers, a burnus (a hooded cloak), or
     clothes which are stained with saffron or Wars (a
     kind of perfume). Whoever does not find a
     sandal to wear can wear Khuffs, but these should
     be cut short so as not to cover the ankles. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 363: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri 

     Allah's Apostle forbade Ishtimal-As-Samma'
     (wrapping one's body with a garment so that one
     cannot raise its end or take one's hand out of it).
     He also forbade Al-Ihtiba' (sitting on buttocks
     with knees close to abdomen and feet apart with
     the hands circling the knees) while wrapping
     oneself with a single garment, without having a
     part of it over the private parts. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 364: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet forbade two kinds of sales i.e.
     Al-Limais and An-Nibadh (the former is a kind
     of sale in which the deal is completed if the buyer
     touches a thing, without seeing or checking it
     properly and the latter is a kind of a sale in which
     the deal is completed when the seller throws a
     thing towards the buyer giving him no opportunity
     to see, touch or check it) and (the Prophet
     forbade) also Ishtimal-As-Samma' and Al-Ihtiba'
     in a single garment. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 365: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     On the Day of Nahr (10th of Dhul-Hijja, in the
     year prior to the last Hajj of the Prophet when
     Abu Bakr was the leader of the pilgrims in that
     Hajj) Abu Bakr sent me along with other
     announcers to Mina to make a public
     announcement: "No pagan is allowed to perform
     Hajj after this year and no naked person is
     allowed to perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba.
     Then Allah's Apostle sent 'All to read out the
     Surat Bara'a (At-Tauba) to the people; so he
     made the announcement along with us on the day
     of Nahr in Mina: "No pagan is allowed to
     perform Hajj after this year and no naked person
     is allowed to perform the Tawaf around the
     Ka'ba." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 366: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir: 

     I went to Jabir bin 'Abdullah and he was praying
     wrapped in a garment and his Rida was Lying
     beside him. When he finished the prayers, I said
     "O 'Abdullah! You pray (in a single garment)
     while your Rida' is lying beside you." He replied,
     "Yes, I did it intentionally so that the ignorant
     ones like you might see me. I saw the Prophet
     praying like this. " 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 367: 

     Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz: 

     Anas said, 'When Allah's Apostle invaded
     Khaibar, we offered the Fajr prayer there yearly
     in the morning) when it was still dark. The
     Prophet rode and Abu Talha rode too and I was
     riding behind Abu Talha. The Prophet passed
     through the lane of Khaibar quickly and my knee
     was touching the thigh of the Prophet . He
     uncovered his thigh and I saw the whiteness of
     the thigh of the Prophet. When he entered the
     town, he said, 'Allahu Akbar! Khaibar is ruined.
     Whenever we approach near a (hostile) nation
     (to fight) then evil will be the morning of those
     who have been warned.' He repeated this thrice.
     The people came out for their jobs and some of
     them said, 'Muhammad (has come).' (Some of
     our companions added, "With his army.") We
     conquered Khaibar, took the captives, and the
     booty was collected. Dihya came and said, 'O
     Allah's Prophet! Give me a slave girl from the
     captives.' The Prophet said, 'Go and take any
     slave girl.' He took Safiya bint Huyai. A man
     came to the Prophet and said, 'O Allah's
     Apostles! You gave Safiya bint Huyai to Dihya
     and she is the chief mistress of the tribes of
     Quraiza and An-Nadir and she befits none but
     you.' So the Prophet said, 'Bring him along with
     her.' So Dihya came with her and when the
     Prophet saw her, he said to Dihya, 'Take any
     slave girl other than her from the captives.' Anas
     added: The Prophet then manumitted her and
     married her." 

     Thabit asked Anas, "O Abu Hamza! What did
     the Prophet pay her (as Mahr)?" He said, "Her
     self was her Mahr for he manumitted her and
     then married her." Anas added, "While on the
     way, Um Sulaim dressed her for marriage
     (ceremony) and at night she sent her as a bride to
     the Prophet . So the Prophet was a bridegroom
     and he said, 'Whoever has anything (food)
     should bring it.' He spread out a leather sheet
     (for the food) and some brought dates and others
     cooking butter. (I think he (Anas) mentioned
     As-SawTq). So they prepared a dish of Hais (a
     kind of meal). And that was Walrma (the
     marriage banquet) of Allah's Apostle ." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 368: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to offer the Fajr prayer and
     some believing women covered with their veiling
     sheets used to attend the Fajr prayer with him
     and then they would return to their homes
     unrecognized . 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 369: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     the Prophet prayed in a Khamisa (a square
     garment) having marks. During the prayer, he
     looked at its marks. So when he finished the
     prayer he said, "Take this Khamisa of mine to
     Abu Jahm and get me his Inbijaniya (a woolen
     garment without marks) as it (the Khamisa) has
     diverted my attention from the prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 370: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, 'I was looking at its
     (Khamisa's) marks during the prayers and I was
     afraid that it may put me in trial (by taking away
     my attention). 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 371: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     'Aisha had a Qiram (a thin marked woolen
     curtain) with which he had screened one side of
     her home. The Prophet said, "Take away this
     Qiram of yours, as its pictures are still displayed
     in front of me during my prayer (i.e. they divert
     my attention from the prayer)." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 372: 

     Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir: 

     The Prophet was given a silken Farruj as a
     present. He wore it while praying. When he had
     finished his prayer, he took it off violently as if
     with a strong aversion to it and said, "It is not the
     dress of Allah-fearing pious people." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 373: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle in a red leather tent and I
     saw Bilal taking the remaining water with which
     the Prophet had performed ablution. I saw the
     people taking the utilized water impatiently and
     whoever got some of it rubbed it on his body and
     those who could not get any took the moisture
     from the others' hands. Then I saw Bilal carrying
     an 'Anza (a spear-headed stick) which he
     planted in the ground. The Prophet came out
     tucking up his red cloak, and led the people in
     prayer and offered two Rakat (facing the Ka'ba)
     taking 'Anza as a Sutra for his prayer. I saw the
     people and animals passing in front of him
     beyond the 'Anza. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 374: 

     Narrated Abu Hazim: 

     Sahl bin Sa'd was asked about the (Prophet's)
     pulpit as to what thing it was made of? Sahl
     replied: "None remains alive amongst the people,
     who knows about it better than I. It was made of
     tamarisk (wood) of the forest. So and so, the
     slave of so and so prepared it for Allah's Apostle
     . When it was constructed and place (in the
     Mosque), Allah's Apostle stood on it facing the
     Qibla and said 'Allahu Akbar', and the people
     stood behind him (and led the people in prayer).
     He recited and bowed and the people bowed
     behind him. Then he raised his head and stepped
     back, got down and prostrated on the ground
     and then he again ascended the pulpit, recited,
     bowed, raised his head and stepped back, got
     down and prostrate on the ground. So, this is
     what I know about the pulpit." 

     Ahmad bin Hanbal said, "As the Prophet was at
     a higher level than the people, there is no harm
     according to the above-mentioned Hadith if the
     Imam is at a higher level than his followers during
     the prayers." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 375: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once Allah's Apostle fell off a horse and his leg
     or shoulder got injured. He swore that he would
     not go to his wives for one month and he stayed
     in a Mashruba (attic room) having stairs made of
     date palm trunks. So his companions came to
     visit him, and he led them in prayer sitting,
     whereas his companions were standing. When he
     finished the prayer, he said, "Imam is meant to be
     followed, so when he says 'Allahu Akbar,' say
     'Allahu Akbar' and when he bows, bow and
     when he prostrates, prostrate and if he prays
     standing pray, standing. After the 29th day the
     Prophet came down (from the attic room) and
     the people asked him, "O Allah's Apostle! You
     swore that you will not go to your wives for one
     month." He said, "The month is 29 days." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 376: 

     Narrates 'Abdullah bin Shaddad: 

     Maimuna said, "Allah's Apostle was praying
     while I was in my menses, sitting beside him and
     sometimes his clothes would touch me during his
     prostration." Maimuna added, "He prayed on a
     Khumra (a small mat sufficient just for the face
     and the hands while prostrating during prayers). 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 377: 

     Narrated Ishaq: 

     Anas bin Malik said, "My grand-mother Mulaika
     invited Allah's Apostle for a meal which she
     herself had prepared. He ate from it and said,
     'Get up! I will lead you in the prayer.' " Anas
     added, "I took my Hasir, washed it with water as
     it had become dark because of long use and
     Allah's Apostle stood on it. The orphan (Damira
     or Ruh) and I aligned behind him and the old lady
     (Mulaika) stood behind us. Allah's Apostle led us
     in the prayer and offered two Rak'at and then
     left." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 378: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     Allah's Apostle used to pray on Khumra. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 379: 

     Narrated Abu Salama: 

     'Aisha the wife of the Prophet said, "I used to
     sleep in front of Allah's Apostle and my legs
     were opposite his Qibla and in prostration he
     pushed my legs and I withdrew then and when he
     stood, I stretched them.' 'Aisha added, "In those
     days the houses were without lights." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 380: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah Apostle prayed while I was lying like a
     dead body on his family bed between him and his
     Qibla. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 381: 

     Narrated 'Urwa: 

     The Prophet prayed while 'Aisha was lying
     between him and his Qibla on the bed on which
     they used to sleep. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 382: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     We used to pray with the Prophet and some of
     us used to place the ends of their clothes at the
     place of prostration because of scorching heat. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 383: 

     Narrated Abu Maslama: 

     Said bin Yazid Al-Azdi: I asked Anas bin Malik
     whether the Prophet had ever, prayed with his
     shoes on. He replied "Yes." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 384: 

     Narrated Ibrahim: 

     Hammam bin Al-Harith said, "I saw Jarir bin
     'Abdullah urinating. Then he performed ablution
     and passed his (wet) hands over his Khuffs,
     stood up and prayed. He was asked about it. He
     replied that he had seen the Prophet doing the
     same." They approved of this narration as Jarir
     was one of those who embraced Islam very late. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 385l: 

     Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba: 

     I helped the Prophet in performing ablution and
     he passed his wet hands over his Khuffs and
     prayed. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 385u: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Malik: 

     Ibn Buhaina, "When the Prophet prayed, he used
     to separate his arms from his body so widely that
     the whiteness of his armpits was visible." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 386: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever prays like us and
     faces our Quibla and eats our slaughtered
     animals is a Muslim and is under Allah's and His
     Apostle's protection. So do not betray Allah by
     betraying those who are in His protection." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 387: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "I have been ordered to
     fight the people till they say: 'None has the right
     to be worshipped but Allah.' And if they say so,
     pray like our prayers, face our Qibla and
     slaughter as we slaughter, then their blood and
     property will be sacred to us and we will not
     interfere with them except legally and their
     reckoning will be with Allah." Narrated Maimun
     ibn Siyah that he asked Anas bin Malik, "O Abu
     Hamza! What makes the life and property of a
     person sacred?" He replied, "Whoever says,
     'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah',
     faces our Qibla during the prayers, prays like us
     and eats our slaughtered animal, then he is a
     Muslim, and has got the same rights and
     obligations as other Muslims have." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 388: 

     Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari: 

     The Prophet said, "While defecating, neither face
     nor turn your back to the Qibla but face either
     east or west." Abu Aiyub added. "When we
     arrived in Sham we came across some lavatories
     facing the Qibla; therefore we turned ourselves
     while using them and asked for Allah's
     forgiveness." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 389: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Dmar: 

     I asked Ibn 'Umar, "Can a person who has
     performed the Tawaf around the Ka'ba for
     'Umra but has not performed the (Sa'i) Tawaf of
     Safa and Marwa, have a sexual relation with his
     wife?" Ibn 'Umar replied "When the Prophet
     reached Mecca he performed the Tawaf around
     the Ka'ba (circumambulated it seven times) and
     offered a two-Rak'at prayer (at the place) behind
     the station (of Abraham) and then performed the
     Tawaf (Sa'i) of Safa and Marwa, and verily in
     Allah's Apostle you have a good example." Then
     we put the same question to Jabir bin 'Abdullah
     and he too replied, "He should not go near his
     wife (for sexual relation) till he has finished the
     Tawaf of Safa and Marwa." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 390: 

     Narrated Mujahid: 

     Someone came to Ibn 'Umar and said, "Here is
     Allah's Apostle entering the Ka'ba." Ibn 'Umar
     said, "I went there but the Prophet had come out
     of the Ka'ba and I found Bilal standing between
     its two doors. I asked Bilal, 'Did the Prophet
     pray in the Ka'ba?' Bilal replied, 'Yes, he prayed
     two Rakat between the two pillars which are to
     your left on entering the Ka'ba. Then Allah's
     Apostle came out and offered a two-Rak'at
     prayer facing the Ka'ba.' " 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 391: 

     Narrated Ibn Abbas: 

     When the Prophet entered the Ka'ba, he invoked
     Allah in each and every side of it and did not
     pray till he came out of it, and offered a
     two-Rak'at prayer facing the Ka'ba and said,
     "This is the Qibla." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 392: 

     Narrated Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     Allah's Apostle prayed facing Baitul-Maqdis for
     sixteen or seventeen months but he loved to face
     the Ka'ba (at Mecca) so Allah revealed: "Verily,
     We have seen the turning of your face to the
     heaven!" (2:144) So the Prophet faced the Ka'ba
     and the fools amongst the people namely "the
     Jews" said, "What has turned them from their
     Qibla (Bait-ul-Maqdis) which they formerly
     observed"" (Allah revealed): "Say: 'To Allah
     belongs the East and the West. He guides whom
     he will to a straight path'." (2:142) A man prayed
     with the Prophet (facing the Ka'ba) and went
     out. He saw some of the Ansar praying the 'Asr
     prayer with their faces towards Bait-ul-Maqdis,
     he said, "I bear witness that I prayed with Allah's
     Apostle facing the Ka'ba." So all the people
     turned their faces towards the Ka'ba. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 393: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Allah's Apostle used to pray (optional,
     non-obligatory prayer) while riding on his mount
     (Rahila) wherever it turned, and whenever he
     wanted to pray the compulsory prayer he
     dismounted and prayed facing the Qibla. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 394: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet prayed (and the subnarrator
     Ibrahim said, "I do not know whether he prayed
     more or less than usual"), and when he had
     finished the prayers he was asked, "O Allah's
     Apostle! Has there been any change in the
     prayers?" He said, "What is it?' The people said,
     "You have prayed so much and so much." So the
     Prophet bent his legs, faced the Qibla and
     performed two prostrations (of Sahu) and
     finished his prayers with Tasiim (by turning his
     face to right and left saying:
     'As-Salamu'Alaikum-Warahmat-ullah'). When he
     turned his face to us he said, "If there had been
     anything changed in the prayer, surely I would
     have informed you but I am a human being like
     you and liable to forget like you. So if I forget
     remind me and if anyone of you is doubtful about
     his prayer, he should follow what he thinks to be
     correct and complete his prayer accordingly and
     finish it and do two prostrations (of Sahu)." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 395: 

     Narrated 'Umar (bin Al-Khattab): 

     My Lord agreed with me in three things: 

     1. I said,"O Allah's Apostle, I wish we took the
     station of Abraham as our praying place (for
     some of our prayers). So came the Divine
     Inspiration: And take you (people) the station of
     Abraham as a place of prayer (for some of your
     prayers e.g. two Rakat of Tawaf of Ka'ba)".
     (2.125) 

     2. And as regards the (verse of) the veiling of the
     women, I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! I wish you
     ordered your wives to cover themselves from the
     men because good and bad ones talk to them.'
     So the verse of the veiling of the women was
     revealed. 

     3. Once the wives of the Prophet made a united
     front against the Prophet and I said to them, 'It
     may be if he (the Prophet) divorced you, (all)
     that his Lord (Allah) will give him instead of you
     wives better than you.' So this verse (the same as
     I had said) was revealed." (66.5). 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 396: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     as above (395). 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 397: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     While the people were offering the Fajr prayer at
     Quba (near Medina), someone came to them
     and said: "It has been revealed to Allah's Apostle
     tonight, and he has been ordered to pray facing
     the Ka'ba." So turn your faces to the Ka'ba.
     Those people were facing Sham (Jerusalem) so
     they turned their faces towards Ka'ba (at
     Mecca). 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 398: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     "Once the Prophet offered five Rakat in Zuhr
     prayer. He was asked, "Is there an increase in
     the prayer?" The Prophet said, "And what is it?"
     They said, "You have prayed five Rakat.' So he
     bent his legs and performed two prostrations (of
     Sahu). 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 399: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet saw some sputum in the direction of
     the Qibla (on the wall of the mosque) and he
     disliked that and the sign of disgust was apparent
     from his face. So he got up and scraped it off
     with his hand and said, "Whenever anyone of you
     stands for the prayer, he is speaking in private to
     his Lord or his Lord is between him and his
     Qibla. So, none of you should spit in the
     direction of the Qibla but one can spit to the left
     or under his foot." The Prophet then took the
     corner of his sheet and spat in it and folded it and
     said, "Or you can do like this. " 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 400: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: Allah's Apostle
     saw sputum on the wall of the mosque in the
     direction of the Qibla and scraped it off. He
     faced the people and said, "Whenever any one of
     you is praying, he should not spit in front of him
     because in the prayer Allah is in front of him." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 401: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the mother of faithful believers) Allah's Apostle
     saw some nasal secretions, expectoration or
     sputum on the wall of the mosque in the direction
     of the Qibla and scraped it off. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 402: 

     Narrated Abd Huraira and Abu Said: 

     Allah's Apostle saw some expectoration on the
     wall of the mosque; he took gravel and scraped it
     off and said, "If anyone of you wanted to spit he
     should neither spit in front of him nor on his right
     but he could spit either on his left or under his left
     foot." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 403: 

     Narrated Abd Huraira and Abu Sa'id: 

     Allah's Apostle saw some expectoration on the
     wall of the mosque; he took gravel and scraped it
     off and said, "If anyone of you wanted to spit, he
     should neither spit in front of him nor on his right
     but could spit either on his left or under his left
     foot." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 404: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "None of you should spit in
     front or on his right but he could spit either on his
     left or under his foot." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 405: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "A faithful believer while in
     prayer is speaking in private to his Lord, so he
     should neither spit in front of him nor to his right
     side but he could spit either on his left or under
     his foot." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 406: 

     Narrated Abu Said: 

     The Prophet saw sputum on (the wall of) the
     mosque in the direction of the Qibla and scraped
     it off with gravel. Then he forbade Spitting in
     front or on the right, but allowed it on one's left
     or under one's left foot. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 407: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Spitting in the mosque is a sin
     and its expiation is to bury it." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 408: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Prophet said, "If anyone of you stands for
     prayer, he should not spit in front of him because
     in prayer he is speaking in private to Allah and he
     should not spit on his right as there is an angel,
     but he can spit either on his left or under his left
     foot and bury it (i.e. expectoration)." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 409: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet saw expectoration (on the wall of
     the mosque) in the direction of the Qibla and
     scraped it off with his hand. It seemed that he
     disliked it and the sign of disgust was apparent
     from his face. He said, "If anyone of you stands
     for the prayer, he is speaking in private to his
     Lord, (or) his Lord is between him and his Qibla,
     therefore he should not spit towards his Qibla,
     but he could spit either on his left or under his
     foot." Then he took the corner of his sheet and
     spat in it, folded it and said, "Or do like this." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 410: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Do you consider or see
     that my face is towards the Qibla? By Allah,
     neither your submissiveness nor your bowing is
     hidden from me, surely I see you from my back."


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 411: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet led us in a prayer and then got up
     on the pulpit and said, "In your prayer and
     bowing, I certainly see you from my back as I
     see you (while looking at you.)" 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 412: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle ordered for a horse race; the
     trained horses were to run from a place called
     Al-Hafya' to Thaniyat Al-Wada' and the horses
     which were not trained were to run from
     Al-Thaniya to the Masjid (mosque of) Bani
     Zuraiq. The sub narrator added: Ibn Umar was
     one of those who took part in the race. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 413: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Some goods came to Allah's Apostle from
     Bahrain. The Prophet ordered the people to
     spread them in the mosque --it was the biggest
     amount of goods Allah's Apostle had ever
     received. He left for prayer and did not even
     look at it. After finishing the prayer, he sat by
     those goods and gave from those to everybody
     he saw. Al-'Abbas came to him and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! give me (something) too,
     because I gave ransom for myself and 'Aqil"
     Allah's Apostle told him to take. So he stuffed his
     garment with it and tried to carry it away but he
     failed to do so. He said, "O Allah's Apostle!
     Order someone to help me in lifting it." The
     Prophet refused. He then said to the Prophet:
     Will you please help me to lift it?" Allah's Apostle
     refused. Then Al-'Abbas threw some of it and
     tried to lift it (but failed). He again said, "O
     Allah's Apostle Order someone to help me to lift
     it." He refused. Al-'Abbas then said to the
     Prophet: "Will you please help me to lift it?" He
     again refused. Then Al-'Abbas threw some of it,
     and lifted it on his shoulders and went away.
     Allah's Apostle kept on watching him till he
     disappeared from his sight and was astonished at
     his greediness. Allah's Apostle did not get up till
     the last coin was distributed. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 414: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I found the Prophet in the mosque along with
     some people. He said to me, "Did Abu Talha
     send you?" I said, "Yes". He said, "For a meal?"
     I said, "Yes." Then he said to his companions,
     "Get up." They set out and I was ahead of them. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 415: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd: 

     A man said, "O Allah's Apostle! If a man finds
     another man with his wife, (committing adultery)
     should the husband kill him?" Later on I saw
     them (the man and his wife) doing Lian in the
     mosque. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 416: 

     Narrated 'Itban bin Malik: 

     The Prophet came to my house and said, "Where
     do you like me to pray?" I pointed to a place.
     The Prophet then said, "Allahu Akbar", and we
     aligned behind him and he offered a two-Rak'at
     prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 417: 

     Narrated 'Itban bin Malik: 

     who was one of the companions of Allah's
     Apostle and one of the Ansar's who took part in
     the battle of Badr: I came to Allah's Apostle and
     said, "O Allah's Apostle I have weak eyesight
     and I lead my people in prayers. When it rains
     the water flows in the valley between me and my
     people so I cannot go to their mosque to lead
     them in prayer. O Allah's Apostle! I wish you
     would come to my house and pray in it so that I
     could take that place as a Musalla. Allah's
     Apostle said. "Allah willing, I will do so." Next
     day after the sun rose high, Allah's Apostle and
     Abu Bakr came and Allah's Apostle asked for
     permission to enter. I gave him permission and he
     did not sit on entering the house but said to me,
     "Where do you like me to pray?" I pointed to a
     place in my house. So Allah's Apostle stood
     there and said, 'Allahu Akbar', and we all got up
     and aligned behind him and offered a two-Rak'at
     prayer and ended it with Taslim. We requested
     him to stay for a meal called "Khazira" which we
     had prepared for him. Many members of our
     family gathered in the house and one of them
     said, "Where is Malik bin Al-Dukhaishin or Ibn
     Al-Dukhshun?" One of them replied, "He is a
     hypocrite and does not love Allah and His
     Apostle." Hearing that, Allah's Apostle said, "Do
     not say so. Haven't you seen that he said, 'None
     has the right to be worshipped but Allah' for
     Allah's sake only?" He said, "Allah and His
     Apostle know better. We have seen him helping
     and advising hypocrites." 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Allah has forbidden the
     (Hell) fire for those who say, 'None has the right
     to be worshipped but Allah' for Allah's sake
     only." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 418: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to start every thing from the
     right (for good things) whenever it was possible
     in all his affairs; for example: in washing, combing
     or wearing shoes. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 419: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Um Habiba and Um Salama mentioned about a
     church they had seen in Ethiopia in which there
     were pictures. They told the Prophet about it, on
     which he said, "If any religious man dies amongst
     those people they would build a place of worship
     at his grave and make these pictures in it. They
     will be the worst creature in the sight of Allah on
     the Day of Resurrection." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 420: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     When the Prophet arrived Medina he
     dismounted at 'Awali-i-Medina amongst a tribe
     called Banu 'Amr bin 'Auf. He stayed there For
     fourteen nights. Then he sent for Bani An-Najjar
     and they came armed with their swords. As if I
     am looking (just now) as the Prophet was sitting
     over his Rahila (Mount) with Abu Bakr riding
     behind him and all Banu An-Najjar around him
     till he dismounted at the courtyard of Abu
     Aiyub's house. The Prophet loved to pray
     wherever the time for the prayer was due even at
     sheep-folds. Later on he ordered that a mosque
     should be built and sent for some people of
     Banu-An-Najjar and said, "O Banu An-Najjar!
     Suggest to me the price of this (walled) piece of
     land of yours." They replied, "No! By Allah! We
     do not demand its price except from Allah."
     Anas added: There were graves of pagans in it
     and some of it was unleveled and there were
     some date-palm trees in it. The Prophet ordered
     that the graves of the pagans be dug out and the
     unleveled land be level led and the date-palm
     trees be cut down . (So all that was done). They
     aligned these cut date-palm trees towards the
     Qibla of the mosque (as a wall) and they also
     built two stone side-walls (of the mosque). His
     companions brought the stones while reciting
     some poetic verses. The Prophet was with them
     and he kept on saying, "There is no goodness
     except that of the Hereafter, O Allah! So please
     forgive the Ansars and the emigrants. " 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 421: 

     Narrated Abu Al-Taiyah: 

     Anas said, "The Prophet prayed in the sheep
     fold." Later on I heard him saying, "He prayed in
     the sheep folds before the construction of the,
     mosque." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 422: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     "I saw Ibn 'Umar praying while taking his camel
     as a Sutra in front of him and he said, "I saw the
     Prophet doing the same." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 423: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     The sun eclipsed and Allah's Apostle offered the
     eclipse prayer and said, "I have been shown the
     Hellfire (now) and I never saw a worse and
     horrible sight than the sight I have seen today." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 424: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet had said, "Offer some of your
     prayers (Nawafil) at home, and do not take your
     houses as graves." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 425: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Do not enter (the places)
     of these people where Allah's punishment had
     fallen unless you do so weeping. If you do not
     weep, do not enter (the places of these people)
     because Allah's curse and punishment which fell
     upon them may fall upon you." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 426: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Um Salama told Allah's Apostle about a church
     which she had seen in Ethiopia and which was
     called Mariya. She told him about the pictures
     which she had seen in it. Allah's Apostle said, "If
     any righteous pious man dies amongst them, they
     would build a place of worship at his grave and
     make these pictures in it; they are the worst
     creatures in the sight of Allah." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 427: 

     Narrated 'Aisha and 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     When the last moment of the life of Allah's
     Apostle came he started putting his 'Khamisa' on
     his face and when he felt hot and short of breath
     he took it off his face and said, "May Allah curse
     the Jews and Christians for they built the places
     of worship at the graves of their Prophets." The
     Prophet was warning (Muslims) of what those
     had done. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 428: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "May Allah's curse be on
     the Jews for they built the places of worship at
     the graves of their Prophets." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 429: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "I have been given five
     things which were not given to any amongst the
     Prophets before me. These are: 

     1. Allah made me victorious by awe (by His
     frightening my enemies) for a distance of one
     month's journey. 

     2. The earth has been made for me (and for my
     followers) a place for praying and a thing to
     perform Tayammum. Therefore my followers can
     pray wherever the time of a prayer is due. 

     3. The booty has been made Halal (lawful) for
     me (and was not made so for anyone else). 

     4. Every Prophet used to be sent to his nation
     exclusively but I have been sent 1o all mankind. 

     5. I have been given the right of intercession (on
     the Day of Resurrection.) 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 430: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     There was a black slave girl belonging to an
     'Arab tribe and they manumitted her but she
     remained with them. The slave girl said, "Once
     one of their girls (of that tribe) came out wearing
     a red leather scarf decorated with precious
     stones. It fell from her or she placed it
     somewhere. A kite passed by that place, saw it
     Lying there and mistaking it for a piece of meat,
     flew away with it. Those people searched for it
     but they did not find it. So they accused me of
     stealing it and started searching me and even
     searched my private parts." The slave girl further
     said, "By Allah! while I was standing (in that
     state) with those people, the same kite passed by
     them and dropped the red scarf and it fell
     amongst them. I told them, 'This is what you
     accused me of and I was innocent and now this
     is it.' " 'Aisha added: That slave girl came to
     Allah's Apostle and embraced Islam. She had a
     tent or a small room with a low roof in the
     mosque. Whenever she called on me, she had a
     talk with me and whenever she sat with me, she
     would recite the following: "The day of the scarf
     (band) was one of the wonders of our Lord,
     verily He rescued me from the disbelievers' town.
     'Aisha added: "Once I asked her, 'What is the
     matter with you? Whenever you sit with me, you
     always recite these poetic verses.' On that she
     told me the whole story. " 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 431: 

     Narrated Naf'a: 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar said: I used to sleep in the
     mosque of the Prophet while I was young and
     unmarried. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 432: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd: 

     Allah's Apostle went to Fatima's house but did
     not find 'Ali there. So he asked, "Where is your
     cousin?" She replied, "There was something
     between us and he got angry with me and went
     out. He did not sleep (mid-day nap) in the
     house." Allah's Apostle asked a person to look
     for him. That person came and said, "O Allah's
     Apostle! He (Ali) is sleeping in the mosque."
     Allah's Apostle went there and 'Ali was lying. His
     upper body cover had fallen down to one side of
     his body and he was covered with dust. Allah's
     Apostle started cleaning the dust from him saying:
     "Get up! O Aba Turab. Get up! O Aba Turab
     (literally means: O father of dust). 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 433: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I saw seventy of As-Suffa men and none of them
     had a Rida' (a garment covering the upper part of
     the body). They had either Izars (only) or sheets
     which they tied round their necks. Some of these
     sheets reached the middle of their legs and some
     reached their heels and they used to gather them
     with their hands lest their private parts should
     become naked. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 434: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     I went to the Prophet in the mosque (the
     sub-narrator Mas'ar thought that Jabir had said,
     "In the forenoon.") He ordered me to pray two
     Rakat. He owed me some money and he repaid
     it to me and gave more than what was due to me.


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 435: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada Al-Aslami: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you enters a
     mosque, he should pray two Rakat before
     sitting." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 436: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The angels keep on asking
     Allah's forgiveness for anyone of you, as long as
     he is at his Mu,salla (praying place) and he does
     not pass wind (Hadath). They say, 'O Allah!
     Forgive him, O Allah! be Merciful to him." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 437: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     In the life-time of Allah's Apostle the mosque
     was built of adobes, its roof of the leaves of
     date-palms and its pillars of the stems of
     date-palms. Abu Bakr did not alter it. 'Umar
     expanded it on the same pattern as it was in the
     lifetime of Allah's Apostle by using adobes,
     leaves of date-palms and changing the pillars into
     wooden ones. 'Uthman changed it by expanding
     it to a great extent and built its walls with
     engraved stones and lime and made its pillars of
     engraved stones and its roof of teak wood. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 438: 

     Narrated 'Ikrima: 

     Ibn 'Abbas said to me and to his son 'Ali, "Go to
     Abu Sa'id and listen to what he narrates." So we
     went and found him in a garden looking after it.
     He picked up his Rida', wore it and sat down
     and started narrating till the topic of the
     construction of the mosque reached. He said,
     "We were carrying one adobe at a time while
     'Ammar was carrying two. The Prophet saw him
     and started removing the dust from his body and
     said, "May Allah be Merciful to 'Ammar. He will
     be inviting them (i.e. his murderers, the rebellious
     group) to Paradise and they will invite him to
     Hell-fire." 'Ammar said, "I seek refuge with Allah
     from affliction." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 439: 

     Narrated Sahl: 

     Allah's Apostle sent someone to a woman telling
     her to "Order her slave, carpenter, to prepare a
     wooden pulpit for him to sit on." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 440: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     A woman said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall I get
     something constructed for you to sit on as I have
     a slave who is a carpenter?" He replied, "Yes, if
     you like." So she had that pulpit constructed. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 441: 

     Narrated 'Ubdaidullah Al-Khaulani: 

     I heard 'Uthman bin 'Affan saying, when people
     argued too much about his intention to
     reconstruct the mosque of Allah's Apostle, "You
     have talked too much. I heard the Prophet
     saying, 'Whoever built a mosque, (Bukair thought
     that 'Asim, another subnarrator, added,
     "Intending Allah's Pleasure"), Allah would build
     for him a similar place in Paradise.' " 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 442: 

     Narrated 'Amr: 

     I heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, "A man
     passed through the mosque carrying arrows.
     Allah's Apostle said to him, 'Hold them by their
     heads.' " 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 443: 

     Narrated Abu Burda bin 'Abdulla: 

     (on the authority of his father) The Prophet said,
     "Whoever passes through our mosques or
     markets with arrows should hold them by their
     heads lest he should injure a Muslim." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 444: 

     Narrated Hassan bin Thabit Al-Ansari: 

     I asked Abu Huraira "By Allah! Tell me the truth
     whether you heard the Prophet saying, 'O
     Hassan! Reply on behalf of Allah's Apostle. O
     Allah! Help him with the Holy Spirit." Abu
     Huraira said, "Yes . " 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 445: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Once I saw Allah's Apostle at the door of my
     house while some Ethiopians were playing in the
     mosque (displaying their skill with spears).
     Allah's Apostle was screening me with his Rida'
     so as to enable me to see their display. ('Urwa
     said that 'Aisha said, "I saw the Prophet and the
     Ethiopians were playing with their spears.") 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 446: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Barira came to seek my help regarding her
     manumission. I told herself you like I would pay
     your price to your masters but your Al-Wala(1)
     would be for me." Her masters said, "If you like,
     you can pay what remains (of the price of her
     manumission), (Sufyan the sub-narrator once
     said), or if you like you can manumit her, but her
     (inheritance) Al-Wala would be for us. "When
     Allah's Apostle came, I spoke to him about it.
     He said, "Buy her and manumit her. No doubt
     Al-Wala(1) is for the manumitted." Then Allah's
     Apostle stood on the pulpit (or Allah's Apostle
     ascended the pulpit as Sufyan once said), and
     said, "What about some people who impose
     conditions which are not present in Allah's Book
     (Laws)? Whoever imposes conditions which are
     not in Allah's Book (Laws), his conditions will be
     invalid even if he imposed them a hundred times."


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 447: 

     Narrated Ka'b: 

     In the mosque l asked Ibn Abi Hadrad to pay the
     debts which he owed to me and our voices grew
     louder. Allah's Apostle heard that while he was in
     his house. So he came to us raising the curtain of
     his room and said, "O Ka'b!" I replied, "Labaik,
     O Allah's Apostle!" He said, "O Ka'b! reduce
     your debt to one half," gesturing with his hand. I
     said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have done so." Then
     Allah's Apostle said (to Ibn Abi Hadrad), "Get
     up and pay the debt to him." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 448: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     A black man or a black woman used to sweep
     the mosque and he or she died. The Prophet
     asked about her (or him). He was told that she
     (or he) had died. He said, "Why did you not
     inform me? Show me his grave (or her grave)."
     So he went to her (his) grave and offered her
     (his) funeral prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 449: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When the verses of Surat "Al-Baqara"' about the
     usury Riba were revealed, the Prophet went to
     the mosque and recited them in front of the
     people and then banned the trade of alcohol. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 450f: 

     Narrated Abu Rafi: 

     Abu Huraira said, "A man or a woman used to
     clean the mosque." (A sub-narrator said, 'Most
     probably a woman..') Then he narrated the
     Hadith of the Prophet 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 450m: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     "The Prophet said, "Last night a big demon
     (afreet) from the Jinns came to me and wanted to
     interrupt my prayers (or said something similar)
     but Allah enabled me to overpower him. I
     wanted to fasten him to one of the pillars of the
     mosque so that all of you could See him in the
     morning but I remembered the statement of my
     brother Solomon (as stated in Quran): My Lord!
     Forgive me and bestow on me a kingdom such
     as shall not belong to anybody after me (38.35)."
     The sub narrator Rauh said, "He (the demon)
     was dismissed humiliated." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 451: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet sent some horsemen to Najd and
     they brought a man called Thumama bin Uthal
     from Bani Hanifa. They fastened him to one of
     the pillars of the mosque. The Prophet came and
     ordered them to release him. He went to a
     (garden of) date-palms near the mosque, took a
     bath and entered the, mosque again and said,
     "None has the right to be worshipped but Allah
     an Muhammad is His Apostle (i.e. he embraced
     Islam)." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 452: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     On the day of Al-Khandaq (battle of the Trench'
     the medial arm vein of Sa'd bin Mu'ad was
     injured and the Prophet pitched a tent in the
     mosque to look after him. There was another tent
     for Banu Ghaffar in the mosque and the blood
     started flowing from Sa'd's tent to the tent of
     Bani Ghaffar. They shouted, "O occupants of the
     tent! What is coming from you to us?" They
     found that Sa'd' wound was bleeding profusely
     and Sa'd died in his tent. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 453: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     I complained to Allah's Apostle that I was sick.
     He told me to perform the Tawaf behind the
     people while riding. So I did so and Allah's
     Apostle was praying beside the Ka'ba and
     reciting the Sura starting with
     "Wat-tur-wa-Kitabinmastur." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 454: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Two of the companions of the Prophet departed
     from him on a dark night and were led by two
     lights like lamps (going in front of them from
     Allah as a miracle) lighting the way in front of
     them, and when they parted, each of them was
     accompanied by one of these lights till he
     reached their (respective) houses. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 455: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet delivered a sermon and said, "Allah
     gave a choice to one of (His) slaves either to
     choose this world or what is with Him in the
     Hereafter. He chose the latter." Abu Bakr wept.
     I said lo myself, "Why is this Sheikh weeping, if
     Allah gave choice to one (of His) slaves either to
     choose this world or what is with Him in the
     Here after and he chose the latter?" And that
     slave was Allah's Apostle himself. Abu Bakr
     knew more than us. The Prophet said, "O Abu
     Bakr! Don't weep. The Prophet added: Abu-
     Bakr has favored me much with his property and
     company. If I were to take a Khalil from
     mankind I would certainly have taken Abu Bakr
     but the Islamic brotherhood and friendship is
     sufficient. Close all the gates in the mosque
     except that of Abu Bakr. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 456: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     "Allah's Apostle in his fatal illness came out with
     a piece of cloth tied round his head and sat on
     the pulpit. After thanking and praising Allah he
     said, "There is no one who had done more favor
     to me with life and property than Abu Bakr bin
     Abi Quhafa. If I were to take a Khalil, I would
     certainly have taken Abu- Bakr but the Islamic
     brotherhood is superior. Close all the small doors
     in this mosque except that of Abu Bakr." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 457: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Ibn 'Umar said, "The Prophet arrived at Mecca
     and sent for 'Uthman bin Talha. He opened the
     gate of the Ka'ba and the Prophet, Bilal, Usama
     bin Zaid and 'Uthman bin Talha entered the
     Ka'ba and then they closed its door (from
     inside). They stayed there for an hour, and then
     came out." Ibn 'Umar added, "I quickly went to
     Bilal and asked him (whether the Prophet had
     prayed). Bilal replied, 'He prayed in it.' I asked,
     'Where?' He replied, 'Between the two pillars.'
     "Ibn 'Umar added, "I forgot to ask how many
     Rakat he (the Prophet) had prayed in the Ka'ba."


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 458: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle sent some horse men to Najd
     and they brought a man called Thumama bin
     Uthal from Bani Hanifa. They fastened him to
     one of the pillars of the mosque. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 459: 

     Narrated Al-Sa'ib bin Yazid: 

     I was standing in the mosque and somebody
     threw a gravel at me. I looked and found that he
     was 'Umar bin Al-Khattab. He said to me,
     "Fetch those two men to me." When I did, he
     said to them, "Who are you? (Or) where do you
     come from?" They replied, "We are from Ta'if."
     'Umar said, "Were you from this city (Medina) I
     would have punished you for raising your voices
     in the mosque of Allah's Apostle 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 460: 

     Narrated 'Kab bin Malik: 

     During the life-time of Allah's Apostle I asked
     Ibn Abi Hadrad in the mosque to pay the debts
     which he owed to me and our voices grew so
     loud that Allah's Apostle heard them while he
     was in his house. So he came to us after raising
     the curtain of his room. The Prophet said, "O
     Ka'b bin Malik!" I replied, "Labaik, O Allah's
     Apostle." He gestured with his hand to me to
     reduce the debt to one half. I said, "O Allah's
     Apostle have done it." Allah's Apostle said (to
     Ibn Hadrad), "Get up and pay it." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 461: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Ibn 'Umar said, "While the Prophet was on the
     pulpit, a man asked him how to offer the night
     prayers. He replied, 'Pray two Rakat at a time
     and then two and then two and so on, and if you
     are afraid of the dawn (the approach of the time
     of the Fajr prayer) pray one Rak'a and that will
     be the witr for all the Rakat which you have
     offered." Ibn 'Umar said, "The last Rakat of the
     night prayer should be odd for the Prophet
     ordered it to be so. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 462: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     A man came to the Prophet while he was
     delivering the sermon and asked him how to offer
     the night prayers. The Prophet replied, 'Pray two
     Rakat at a time and then two and then two and
     so on and if you are afraid of dawn (the
     approach of the time of the Fajr prayer) pray one
     Rak'a and that will be the with for all the Rakat
     which you have prayed." Narrated 'Ubaidullah
     bin 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: A man called the
     Prophet while he was in the mosque. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 463: 

     Narrated Abu Waqid al-Laithi: 

     While Allah's Apostle was sitting in the mosque
     (with some people) three men came, two of them
     came in front of Allah's Apostle and the third one
     went away, and then one of them found a place
     in the circle and sat there while the second man
     sat behind the gathering, and the third one went
     away. When Allah's Apostle finished his
     preaching, he said, "Shall I tell you about these
     three persons? One of them betook himself to
     Allah and so Allah accepted him and
     accommodated him; the second felt shy before
     Allah so Allah did the same for him and sheltered
     him in His Mercy (and did not punish him), while
     the third turned his face from Allah, and went
     away, so Allah turned His face from him
     likewise. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 464: 

     Narrated 'Abbad bin Tamim: 

     that his uncle said, "I saw Allah's Apostle lying
     flat (on his back) in the mosque with one leg on
     the other." Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab that
     'Umar and 'Uthman used to do the same. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 465: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) I had seen my parents
     following Islam since I attained the age of
     puberty. Not a day passed but the Prophet
     visited us, both in the mornings and evenings. My
     father Abii Bakr thought of building a mosque in
     the courtyard of his house and he did so. He
     used to pray and recite the Qur'an in it. The
     pagan women and their children used to stand by
     him and look at him with surprise. Abu Bakr was
     a Softhearted person and could not help weeping
     while reciting the Quran. The chiefs of the
     Quraish pagans became afraid of that (i.e. that
     their children and women might be affected by
     the recitation of Quran)." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 466: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The prayer offered in
     congregation is twenty five times more superior
     (in reward) to the prayer offered alone in one's
     house or in a business center, because if one
     performs ablution and does it perfectly, and then
     proceeds to the mosque with the sole intention of
     praying, then for each step which he takes
     towards the mosque, Allah upgrades him a
     degree in reward and (forgives) crosses out one
     sin till he enters the mosque. When he enters the
     mosque he is considered in prayer as long as he
     is waiting for the prayer and the angels keep on
     asking for Allah's forgiveness for him and they
     keep on saying: 'O Allah! Be Merciful to him, O
     Allah! Forgive him, as long as he keeps on sitting
     at his praying place and does not pass wind.
     (See Hadith No. 620). 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 467: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar or Ibn 'Amr: 

     The Prophet clasped his hands, by interlacing his
     fingers. Narrated 'Abdullah that Allah's Apostle
     said, "O 'Abdullah bin 'Amr! What will be your
     condition when you will be left with the sediments
     of (worst) people?" (They will be in conflict with
     each other). 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 468: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "A faithful believer to a faithful
     believer is like the bricks of a wall, enforcing
     each other." While (saying that) the Prophet
     clasped his hands, by interlacing his fingers. 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 469: 

     Narrates Ibn Sirin: 

     Abu Huraira said, "Allah's Apostle led us in one
     of the two 'Isha' prayers (Abu Huraira named
     that prayer but I forgot it)." Abu Huraira added,
     "He prayed two Rakat and then finished the
     prayer with Tasllm. He stood up near a piece of
     wood Lying across the mosque and leaned on it
     in such a way as if he was angry. Then he put his
     right hand over the left and clasped his hands by
     interlacing his fingers and then put his J right
     cheek on the back of his left hand. The people
     who were in haste left the mosque through its
     gates. They wondered whether the prayer was
     reduced. And amongst them were Abu Bakr and
     'Umar but they hesitated to ask the Prophet. A
     long-handed man called Dhul-Yadain asked the
     Prophet, 'O Allah's Apostle! Have you; forgotten
     or has the prayer been reduced?' The Prophet
     replied, 'I have neither forgotten nor has the
     prayer been reduced' The Prophet added, 'Is
     what Dhul Yadain has said true?' They (the
     people) said, 'Yes, it is true.' The Prophet stood
     up again and led the prayer, completing the
     remaining prayer, forgotten by him, and
     performed Talsrm, and then said, 'Allahu Akbar.'
     And then he did a prostration as he used to
     prostrate or longer than that. He then raised his
     head saying, 'Allahu Akbar; he then again said,
     'Allahu Akbar', and prostrated as he used to
     prostrate or longer than that. Then he raised his
     head and said, 'Allahu Akbar.' " (The subnarrator
     added, "I think that they asked (Ibn Sirin)
     whether the Prophet completed the prayer with
     Taslim. He replied, "I heard that 'Imran bin
     Husain had said, 'Then he (the Prophet) did
     Taslim.") 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 470: 

     Narrated Fudail bin Sulaiman: 

     Musa bin 'Uqba said, "I saw Salim bin 'Abdullah
     looking for some places on the way and prayed
     there. He narrated that his father used to pray
     there, and had seen the Prophet praying at those
     very places." 

     Narrated Nafi' on the authority of Ibn 'Umar who
     said, "I used to pray at those places." Musa the
     narrator added, "I asked Salim on which he said,
     'I agree with Nafi' concerning those places,
     except the mosque situated at the place called
     Sharaf Ar-Rawha." 


Volume 1, Book 8, Number 471: 

     Narrated Hadith is about the various places on
     the way from Medina to Mecca where the
     Prophet prayed and their In locations impossible
     to translate. 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 9: 

   Virtues of the Prayer Hall
     (Sutra of the Musalla) 



Volume 1, Book 9, Number 472: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once I came riding a she-ass when I had just
     attained the age of puberty. Allah's Apostle was
     offering the prayer at Mina with no wall in front
     of him and I passed in front of some of the row.
     There I dismounted and let my she-ass loose to
     graze and entered the row and nobody objected
     to me about it. 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 473: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle came out on 'Id day,
     he used to order that a Harba (a short spear) to
     be planted in front of him (as a Sutra for his
     prayer) and then he used to pray facing it with
     the people behind him and used to do the same
     while on a journey. After the Prophet , this
     practice was adopted by the Muslim rulers (who
     followed his traditions). 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 474: 

     Narrated 'Aun bin Abi Juhaifa: 

     I heard my father saying, "The Prophet led us,
     and prayed a two-Rak'at Zuhr prayer and then a
     two-Rak'at 'Asr prayer at Al-Batha' with an
     'Anza (planted) in front of him (as a Sutra) while
     women and donkeys were passing in front of him
     (beyond that 'Anza)." 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 475: 

     Narrated Sahl (bin Sa'd): 

     The distance between the Musalla of Allah's
     Apostle and the wall was just sufficient for a
     sheep to pass through . 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 476: 

     Narrated Salama: 

     The distance between the wall of the mosque and
     the pulpit was hardly enough for a sheep to pass
     through. 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 477: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet used to get a Harba planted in front
     of him (as a Sutra) and pray behind it. 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 478: 

     Narrated 'Aun bin Abi Juhaifa: 

     that he had heard his father saying, "Allah's
     Apostle came to us at mid-day and water was
     brought for his ablution. He performed ablution
     and led us in Zuhr and 'Asr prayers with an 'Anza
     planted in front of him (as a Sutra), while women
     and donkeys were passing beyond it." 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 479: 

     Narrated Anas Ibn Malik: 

     Whenever the Prophet went for answering the
     call of nature, I and another boy used to go after
     him with a staff, a stick or an 'Anza and a tumbler
     of water and when he finished from answering
     the call of nature we would hand that tumbler of
     water to him. 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 480: 

     Narrated Abu Juhaifa: 

     Allah's Apostle came out at midday and offered
     a two-Rak'at Zuhr and 'Asr prayers at Al-Batha
     and an 'Anza was planted in front of him (as a
     Sutra). He performed ablution and the people
     took the remaining water left after his ablution
     and rubbed their bodies with it. 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 481: 

     Narrated Yazid bin Al 'Ubaid: 

     I used to accompany Salama bin Al-Akwa' and
     he used to pray behind the pillar which was near
     the place where the Quran's were kept I said, "O
     Abu Muslim! I see you always seeking to pray
     behind this pillar." He replied, "I saw Allah's
     Apostle always seeking to pray near that pillar." 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 482: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     I saw the most famous people amongst the
     companions of the Prophet hurrying towards the
     pillars at the Maghrib prayer before the Prophet
     came for the prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 483: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet entered the Ka'ba along with
     Usama bin Zaid, 'Uthman bin Talha and Bilal and
     remained there for a long time. When they came
     out, I was the first man to enter the Ka'ba. I
     asked Bilal "Where did the Prophet pray?" Bilal
     replied, "Between the two front Pillars." 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 484: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle
     entered the Ka'ba along with Usama bin Zaid,
     Bilal and 'Uthman bin Talha Al-Hajabi and
     closed the door and stayed there for some time. I
     asked Bilal when he came out, 'What did the
     Prophet do?' He replied, 'He offered prayer with
     one pillar to his left and one to his right and three
     behind.' In those days the Ka'ba was supported
     by six pillars." Malik said: "There were two
     pillars on his (the Prophet's) right side." 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 485: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     "The Prophet used to make his she-camel sit
     across and he would pray facing it (as a Sutra)."
     I asked, "What would the Prophet do if the
     she-camel was provoked and moved?" He said,
     "He would take its camel-saddle and put it in
     front of him and pray facing its back part (as a
     Sutra). And Ibn 'Umar used to do the same."
     (This indicates that one should not pray except
     behind a Sutra). 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 486: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Do you make us (women) equal to dogs and
     donkeys? While I used to lie in my bed, the
     Prophet would come and pray facing the middle
     of the bed. I used to consider it not good to
     stand in front of him in his prayers. So I used to
     slip away slowly and quietly from the foot of the
     bed till I got out of my guilt. 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 487: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id: 

     The Prophet said, (what is ascribed to him in the
     following Hadith 488): 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 488: 

     Narrated Abu Salih As-Samman: 

     I saw Abu Said Al-Khudri praying on a Friday,
     behind something which acted as a Sutra. A
     young man from Bani Abi Mu'ait, wanted to pass
     in front of him, but Abu Said repulsed him with a
     push on his chest. Finding no alternative he again
     tried to pass but Abu Said pushed him with a
     greater force. The young man abused Abu Said
     and went to Marwan and lodged a complaint
     against Abu Said and Abu Said followed the
     young man to Marwan who asked him, "O Abu
     Said! What has happened between you and the
     son of your brother?" Abu Sa'id said to him, "I
     heard the Prophet saying, 'If anybody amongst
     you is praying behind something as a Sutra and
     somebody tries to pass in front of him, then he
     should repulse him and if he refuses, he should
     use force against him for he is a satan.' " 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 489: 

     Narrated Busr bin Said: 

     that Zaid bin Khalid sent him to Abi Juhaim to
     ask him what he had heard from Allah's Apostle
     about a person passing in front of another person
     who was praying. Abu Juhaim replied, "Allah's
     Apostle said, 'If the person who passes in front
     of another person in prayer knew the magnitude
     of his sin he would prefer to wait for 40 (days,
     months or years) rather than to pass in front of
     him." Abu An-Nadr said, "I do not remember
     exactly whether he said 40 days, months or
     years." 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 490: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The things which annul the prayers were
     mentioned before me. They said, "Prayer is
     annulled by a dog, a donkey and a woman (if
     they pass in front of the praying people)." I said,
     "You have made us (i.e. women) dogs. I saw the
     Prophet praying while I used to lie in my bed
     between him and the Qibla. Whenever I was in
     need of something, I would slip away. for I
     disliked to face him." 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 491: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to pray while I was sleeping
     across in his bed in front of him. Whenever he
     wanted to pray Witr, he would wake me up and
     I would pray Witr. 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 492: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     the wife of the Prophet, "I used to sleep in front
     of Allah's Apostle with my legs opposite his
     Qibla (facing him); and whenever he prostrated,
     he pushed my feet and I withdrew them and
     whenever he stood, I stretched them." 'Aisha
     added, "In those days there were no lamps in the
     houses." 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 493: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The things which annual prayer were mentioned
     before me (and those were): a dog, a donkey
     and a woman. I said, "You have compared us
     (women) to donkeys and dogs. By Allah! I saw
     the Prophet praying while I used to lie in (my)
     bed between him and the Qibla. Whenever I was
     in need of something, I disliked to sit and trouble
     the Prophet. So, I would slip away by the side of
     his feet." 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 494: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle used to
     get up at night and pray while I used to lie across
     between him and the Qibla on his family's bed. 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 495: 

     Narrated Abu Qatada Al-Ansari: 

     Allah's Apostle was praying and he was carrying
     Umama the daughters of Zainab, the daughter of
     Allah's Apostle and she was the daughter of 'As
     bin Rabi'a bin 'AbduShams. When he prostrated,
     he put her down and when he stood, he carried
     her (on his neck). 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 496: 

     Narrated Maimuna bint Al-Harith: 

     My bed was beside the praying place (Musalla)
     of the Prophet and sometimes his garment fell on
     me while I used to lie in my bed. 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 497: 

     Narrated Maimuna: 

     The Prophet used to pray while I used to sleep
     beside him during my periods (menses) and in
     prostrations his garment used to touch me. 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 498: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     It is not good that you people have made us
     (women) equal to dogs and donkeys. No doubt I
     saw Allah's Apostle praying while I used to lie
     between him and the Qibla and when he wanted
     to prostrate, he pushed my legs and I withdrew
     them. 


Volume 1, Book 9, Number 499: 

     Narrated 'Amr bin Maimuin: 

     'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, "While Allah's
     Apostle was praying beside the Ka'ba, there
     were some Quraish people sitting in a gathering.
     One of them said, 'Don't you see this (who does
     deeds just to show off)? Who amongst you can
     go and bring the dung, blood and the abdominal
     contents (intestines, etc). of the slaughtered
     camels of the family of so and so and then wait
     till he prostrates and put that in between his
     shoulders?' The most unfortunate amongst them
     ('Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait) went (and brought them)
     and when Allah's Apostle prostrated, he put
     them between his shoulders. The Prophet
     remained in prostration and they laughed so
     much so that they fell on each other. A passerby
     went to Fatima, who was a young girl in those
     days. She came running and the Prophet was still
     in prostration. She removed them and cursed
     upon the Quraish on their faces. When Allah's
     Apostle completed his prayer, he said, 'O Allah!
     Take revenge on Quraish.' He said so thrice and
     added, 'O Allah! take revenge on 'Amr bin
     Hisham, 'Utba bin Rabia, Shaiba bin Rabi'a,
     Al-Walid bin'Utba, Umaiya bin Khalaf, 'Uqba
     bin Abi Mu'ait and 'Umar a bin Al-Walid."
     Abdullah added, "By Allah! I saw all of them
     dead in the battle field on the day of Badr and
     they were dragged and thrown in the Qalib (a
     well) at Badr: Allah's Apostle then said, 'Allah's
     curse has descended upon the people of the
     Qalib (well). 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 10: 

      Times of the Prayers 



Volume 1, Book 10, Number 500: 

     Narrated Ibn Shihab: 

     Once'Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz delayed the prayer
     and 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair went to him and said,
     "Once in 'Iraq, Al-MughTra bin Shu'ba delayed
     his prayers and Abi Mas'ud Al-Ansari went to
     him and said, 'O Mughira! What is this? Don't
     you know that once Gabriel came and offered
     the prayer (Fajr prayer) and Allah's Apostle
     prayed too, then he prayed again (Zuhr prayer)
     and so did Allah's Apostle and again he prayed
     ('Asr prayers and Allah's Apostle did the same;
     again he prayed (Maghrib-prayer) and so did
     Allah's Apostle and again prayed ('Isha prayer)
     and so did Allah's Apostle and (Gabriel) said, 'I
     was ordered to do so (to demonstrate the
     prayers prescribed to you)?'" 'Umar (bin 'Abdul
     'AzTz) said to 'Urwa, "Be sure of what you Say.
     Did Gabriel lead Allah's Apostle at the stated
     times of the prayers?" 'Urwa replied, "Bashir bin
     Abi Mas'ud narrated like this on the authority of
     his father." Urwa added, "Aisha told me that
     Allah's Apostle used to pray 'Asr prayer when
     the sun-shine was still inside her residence
     (during the early time of 'Asr)." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 501: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     "Once a delegation of 'Abdul Qais came to
     Allah's Apostle and said, "We belong to such
     and such branch of the tribe of Rab'a and we can
     only come to you in the sacred months. Order us
     to do something good so that we may (carry out)
     take it from you and also invite to it our people
     whom we have left behind (at home)." The
     Prophet said, " I order you to do four things and
     forbid you from four things. (The first four are as
     follows): 

     1. To believe in Allah. (And then he: explained it
     to them i.e.) to testify that none has the right to
     be worshipped but Allah and (Muhammad) am
     Allah's Apostle 

     2. To offer prayers perfectly (at the stated times):

     3. To pay Zakat (obligatory charity) 

     4. To give me Khumus 

     (The other four things which are forbidden are as
     follows): 

     1. Dubba 

     2. Hantam 

     3. Muqaiyat 

     4. Naqir (all these are utensils used for the
     preparation of alcoholic drinks)." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 502: 

     Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah: 

     I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle
     for to offer prayers perfectly, to pay Zakat
     regularly, and to give good advice to every
     Muslim. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 503: 

     Narrated Shaqiq: 

     that he had heard Hudhaifa saying, "Once I was
     sitting with 'Umar and he said, 'Who amongst
     you remembers the statement of Allah's Apostle
     about the afflictions?' I said, 'I know it as the
     Prophet had said it.' 'Umar said, 'No doubt you
     are bold.' I said, 'The afflictions caused for a man
     by his wife, money, children and neighbor are
     expiated by his prayers, fasting, charity and by
     enjoining (what is good) and forbidding (what is
     evil).' 'Umar said, 'I did not mean that but I
     asked about that affliction which will spread like
     the waves of the sea.' I (Hudhaifa) said, 'O
     leader of the faithful believers! You need not be
     afraid of it as there is a closed door between you
     and it.' 'Umar asked, Will the door be broken or
     opened?' I replied, 'It will be broken.' 'Umar
     said, 'Then it will never be closed again.' I was
     asked whether 'Umar knew that door. I replied
     that he knew it as one knows that there will be
     night before the tomorrow morning. I narrated a
     Hadith that was free from any mis-statement"
     The subnarrator added that they deputed
     Masruq to ask Hudhaifa (about the door).
     Hudhaifa said, "The door was 'Umar himself." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 504: 

     Narrated Ibn Mas'ud: 

     A man kissed a woman (unlawfully) and then
     went to the Prophet and informed him. Allah
     revealed: 

     And offer prayers perfectly At the two ends of
     the day And in some hours of the night (i.e. the
     five compulsory prayers). Verily! good deeds
     remove (annul) the evil deeds (small sins)
     (11.114). The man asked Allah's Apostle, "Is it
     for me?" He said, "It is for all my followers." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 505: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     I asked the Prophet "Which deed is the dearest
     to Allah?" He replied, "To offer the prayers at
     their early stated fixed times." I asked, "What is
     the next (in goodness)?" He replied, "To be good
     and dutiful to your parents" I again asked, "What
     is the next (in goodness)?" He replied, 'To
     participate in Jihad (religious fighting) in Allah's
     cause." 'Abdullah added, "I asked only that much
     and if I had asked more, the Prophet would have
     told me more." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 506: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "If there was a
     river at the door of anyone of you and he took a
     bath in it five times a day would you notice any
     dirt on him?" They said, "Not a trace of dirt
     would be left." The Prophet added, "That is the
     example of the five prayers with which Allah
     blots out (annuls) evil deeds." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 507: 

     Narrated Ghailan: 

     Anas said, "I do not find (now-a-days) things as
     they were (practiced) at the time of the Prophet."
     Somebody said "The prayer (is as it was.)" Anas
     said, "Have you not done in the prayer what you
     have done? 

     Narrated Az-Zuhri that he visited Anas bin Malik
     at Damascus and found him weeping and asked
     him why he was weeping. He replied, "I do not
     know anything which I used to know during the
     life-time of Allah's Apostle except this prayer
     which is being lost (not offered as it should be)." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 508: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Whenever anyone of you
     offers his prayer he is speaking in private to his
     Lord. So he should not spit to his right but under
     his left foot." Qatada said, "He should not spit in
     front of him but to his left or under his feet." And
     Shu'ba said, "He should not spit in front of him,
     nor to his right but to his left or under his foot."
     Anas said: The Prophet said, "He should neither
     spit in the direction of his Qibla nor to his right
     but to his left or under his foot." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 509: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Do the prostration properly
     and do not put your fore-arms flat with elbows
     touching the ground like a dog. And if you want
     to spit, do not spit in front, nor to the right for the
     person in prayer is speaking in private to his
     Lord." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 510: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira and 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If it is very hot, then pray
     the Zuhr prayer when it becomes (a bit) cooler,
     as the severity of the heat is from the raging of
     the Hell-fire." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 511: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     The Muadhdhin (call-maker) of the Prophet
     pronounced the Adhan (call) for the Zuhr prayer
     but the Prophet said, "Let it be cooler, let it be
     cooler." Or said, 'Wait, wait, because the
     severity of heat is from the raging of the Hell-fire.
     In severe hot weather, pray when it becomes (a
     bit) cooler and the shadows of hillocks appear." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 512: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "In very hot weather delay the
     Zuhr prayer till it becomes (a bit) cooler because
     the severity of heat is from the raging of Hell-fire.
     The Hell-fire of Hell complained to its Lord
     saying: O Lord! My parts are eating (destroying)
     one another. So Allah allowed it to take two
     breaths, one in the winter and the other in the
     summer. The breath in the summer is at the time
     when you feel the severest heat and the breath in
     the winter is at the time when you feel the
     severest cold." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 513: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id: 

     that Allah's Apostle said, "Pray Zuhr prayer
     when it becomes (a bit) cooler as the severity of
     heat is from the raging of the Hell-fire." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 514: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar Al-Ghifar: 

     We were with the Prophet on a journey and the
     Mu'adhdhin (call maker for the prayer) wanted
     to pronounce the Adhan (call) for the Zuhr
     prayer. The Prophet said, 'Let it become cooler."
     He again (after a while) wanted to pronounce the
     Adhan but the Prophet said to him, "Let it
     become cooler till we see the shadows of
     hillocks." The Prophet added, "The severity of
     heat is from the raging of the Hell-fire, and in
     very hot weather pray (Zuhr) when it becomes
     cooler." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 515: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle came out as the sun declined at
     mid-day and offered the Zuhr prayer. He then
     stood on the pulpit and spoke about the Hour
     (Day of Judgment) and said that in it there would
     be tremendous things. He then said, "Whoever
     likes to ask me about anything he can do so and
     I shall reply as long as I am at this place of mine.
     Most of the people wept and the Prophet said
     repeatedly, "Ask me." Abdullah bin Hudhafa
     As-Sahmi stood up and said, "Who is my
     father?" The Prophet said, "Your father is
     Hudhafa." The Prophet repeatedly said, "Ask
     me." Then Umar knelt before him and said, "We
     are pleased with Allah as our Lord, Islam as our
     religion, and Muhammad as our Prophet." The
     Prophet then became quiet and said, "Paradise
     and Hell-fire were displayed in front of me on
     this wall just now and I have never seen a better
     thing (than the former) and a worse thing (than
     the latter)." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 516: 

     Narrated Abu Al-Minhal: 

     Abu Barza said, "The Prophet used to offer the
     Fajr (prayer) when one could recognize the
     person sitting by him (after the prayer) and he
     used to recite between 60 to 100 Ayat (verses)
     of the Qur'an. He used to offer the Zuhr prayer
     as soon as the sun declined (at noon) and the
     'Asr at a time when a man might go and return
     from the farthest place in Medina and find the sun
     still hot. (The sub-narrator forgot what was said
     about the Maghrib). He did not mind delaying the
     'Isha prayer to one third of the night or the
     middle of the night." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 517: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     When we offered the Zuhr prayers behind Allah's
     Apostle we used to prostrate on our clothes to
     protect ourselves from the heat. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 518: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     "The Prophet prayed eight Rakat for the Zuhr
     and 'Asr, and seven for the Maghrib and 'Isha
     prayers in Medina." Aiyub said, "Perhaps those
     were rainy nights." Anas said, "May be." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 519: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to offer the 'Asr prayer
     when the sunshine had not disappeared from my
     chamber. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 520: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to offer the 'Asr prayers at
     a time when the sunshine was still inside my
     chamber and no shadow had yet appeared in it. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 521: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to pray the 'Asr prayers at a
     time when the sunshine was still inside my
     chamber and no shadow had yet appeared in it. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 522: 

     Narrated Saiyar bin Salama: 

     I along with my father went to Abu- Barza
     Al-Aslarrni and my father asked him, "How
     Allah's Apostle used to offer the five compulsory
     congregational prayers?" Abu- Barza said, "The
     Prophet used to pray the Zuhr prayer which you
     (people) call the first one at mid-day when the
     sun had just declined The Asr prayer at a time
     when after the prayer, a man could go to the
     house at the farthest place in Medina (and arrive)
     while the sun was still hot. (I forgot about the
     Maghrib prayer). The Prophet Loved to delay
     the 'Isha which you call Al- Atama and he
     disliked sleeping before it and speaking after it.
     After the Fajr prayer he used to leave when a
     man could recognize the one sitting beside him
     and he used to recite between 60 to 100 Ayat (in
     the Fajr prayer) . 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 523: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     We used to pray the Asr prayer and after that if
     someone happened to go to the tribe of Bani
     Amr bin Auf, he would find them still praying the
     Asr (prayer). 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 524: 

     Narrated Abu Bakr bin Uthman bin Sahl bin
     Hunaif: 

     that he heard Abu Umama saying: We prayed
     the Zuhr prayer with 'Umar bin Abdul Aziz and
     then went to Anas bin Malik and found him
     offering the Asr prayer. I asked him, "O uncle!
     Which prayer have you offered?" He said 'The
     Asr and this is (the time of) the prayer of Allah s
     Apostle which we used to pray with him." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 525: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle used to offer the 'Asr prayer at a
     time when the sun was still hot and high and if a
     person went to Al-'Awali (a place) of Medina,
     he would reach there when the sun was still high.
     Some of Al-'Awali of Medina were about four
     miles or so from the town. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 526: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     We used to pray the 'Asr and after that if one of
     US went to Quba'he would arrive there while the
     sun was still high. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 527: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever misses the 'Asr
     prayer (intentionally) then it is as if he lost his
     family and property." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 528: 

     Narrated Abu Al-Mahh: 

     We were with Buraida in a battle on a cloudy
     day and he said, "Offer the 'Asr prayer early as
     the Prophet said, "Whoever leaves the 'Asr
     prayer, all his (good) deeds will be annulled." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 529: 

     Narrated Qais: 

     Jarir said, "We were with the Prophet and he
     looked at the moon--full-moon--and said,
     'Certainly you will see your Lord as you see this
     moon and you will have no trouble in seeing Him.
     So if you can avoid missing (through sleep or
     business, etc.) a prayer before the sun-rise (Fajr)
     and a prayer before sunset ('Asr), you must do
     so.' He then recited Allah's Statement: 

     And celebrate the praises Of your Lord before
     The rising of the sun And before (its) setting."
     (50.39) Isma'il said, "Offer those prayers and do
     not miss them." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 530: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Angels come to you in
     succession by night and day and all of them get
     together at the time of the Fajr and 'Asr prayers.
     Those who have passed the night with you (or
     stayed with you) ascend (to the Heaven) and
     Allah asks them, though He knows everything
     about you, well, "In what state did you leave my
     slaves?" The angels reply: "When we left them
     they were praying and when we reached them,
     they were praying." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 531: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you can get
     one Rak'a of the 'Asr prayer before sunset, he
     should complete his prayer. If any of you can get
     one Rak'a of the Fajr prayer before sunrise, he
     should complete his prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 532: 

     Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah: 

     My father said, "I heard Allah's Apostle saying,
     'The period of your stay as compared to the
     previous nations is like the period equal to the
     time between the 'Asr prayer and sunset. The
     people of the Torah were given the Torah and
     they acted (upon it) till mid-day then they were
     exhausted and were given one Qirat (of gold)
     each. And then the people of the Gospel were
     given the Gospel and they acted (upon it) till the
     'Asr prayer then they were exhausted and were!
     given one Qirat each. And then we were given
     the Qur'an and we acted (upon it) till sunset and
     we were given two Qirats each. On that the
     people of both the scriptures said, 'O our Lord!
     You have given them two Qirats and given us
     one Qirat, though we have worked more than
     they.' Allah said, 'Have I usurped some of your
     right?' They said, 'No.' Allah said: "That is my
     blessing I bestow upon whomsoever I wish." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 533: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "The example of Muslims,
     Jews and Christians is like the example of a man
     who employed laborers to work for him from
     morning till night. They worked till mid-day and
     they said, 'We are not in need of your reward.'
     SO the man employed another batch and said to
     them, 'Complete the rest of the day and yours
     will be the wages I had fixed (for the first batch).
     They worked Up till the time of the 'Asr prayer
     and said, 'Whatever we have done is for you.'
     He employed another batch. They worked for
     the rest of the day till sunset, and they received
     the wages of the two former batches." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 534: 

     Narrated Rafi' bin Khadij: 

     We used to offer the Maghrib prayer with the
     Prophet and after finishing the prayer one of us
     may go away and could still see as Par as the
     spots where one's arrow might reach when shot
     by a bow. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 535: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet used to pray the Zuhr at mid-day,
     and the 'Asr at a time when the sun was still
     bright, the Maghrib after sunset (at its stated
     time) and the Isha at a variable time. Whenever
     he saw the people assembled (for Isha' prayer)
     he would pray earlier and if the people delayed,
     he would delay the prayer. And they or the
     Prophet used to offer the Fajr Prayers when it
     still dark. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 536: 

     Narrated Salama: 

     We used to pray the Maghrib prayer with the
     Prophet when the sun disappeared from the
     horizon. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 537: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet prayed seven Rakat together and
     eight Rakat together. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 538: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah Al-Muzani: 

     The Prophet said, "Do not be influenced by
     bedouins regarding the name of your Maghrib
     prayer which is called 'Isha' by them." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 539: 

     Narrated Abdullah: 

     "One night Allah's Apostle led us in the 'Isha'
     prayer and that is the one called Al-'Atma by the
     people. After the completion of the prayer, he
     faced us and said, "Do you know the importance
     of this night? Nobody present on the surface of
     the earth to-night will be living after one hundred
     years from this night." (See Hadith No. 575). 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 540: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin 'Amr: 

     We asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah about the prayers
     of the Prophet . He said, "He used to pray Zuhr
     prayer at mid-day, the 'Asr when the sun was still
     hot, and the Maghrib after sunset (at its stated
     time). The 'Isha was offered early if the people
     gathered, and used to be delayed if their number
     was less; and the morning prayer was offered
     when it was still dark. " 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 541: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle once delayed the 'Isha' prayer
     and that was during the days when Islam still had
     not spread. The Prophet did not come out till
     'Umar informed him that the women and children
     had slept. Then he came out and said to the
     people of the mosque:"None amongst the
     dwellers of the earth has been waiting for it ('Isha
     prayer) except you." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 542: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     My companions, who came with me in the boat
     and I landed at a place called Baqi Buthan. The
     Prophet was in Medina at that time. One of us
     used to go to the Prophet by turns every night at
     the time of the Isha prayer. Once I along with my
     companions went to the Prophet and he was
     busy in some of his affairs, so the 'Isha' prayer
     was delayed to the middle of the night He then
     came out and led the people (in prayer). After
     finishing from the prayer, he addressed the
     people present there saying, "Be patient! Don't
     go away. Have the glad tiding. It is from the
     blessing of Allah upon you that none amongst
     mankind has prayed at this time save you." Or
     said, "None except you has prayed at this time."
     Abu Muisa added, 'So we returned happily after
     what we heard from Alllah's Apostle ." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 543: 

     Narrated Abu Barza: 

     Allah's Apostle disliked to sleep before the 'Isha'
     prayer and to talk after it. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 544: 

     Narrated Ibn Shihab from 'Urwa: 

     'Aisha said, "Once Allah's Apostle delayed the
     'Isha' prayer till 'Umar reminded him by saying,
     "The prayer!" The women and children have
     slept. Then the Prophet came out and said,
     'None amongst the dwellers of the earth has been
     waiting for it (the prayer) except you." Urwa
     said, "Nowhere except in Medina the prayer
     used to be offered (in those days)." He further
     said, "The Prophet used to offer the 'Isha' prayer
     in the period between the disappearance of the
     twilight and the end of the first third of the night." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 545: 

     Narrated Ibn Juraij from Nafi: 

     'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, "Once Allah's Apostle
     was busy (at the time of the 'Isha'), so the prayer
     was delayed so much so that we slept and woke
     up and slept and woke up again. The Prophet
     came out and said, 'None amongst the dwellers
     of the earth but you have been waiting for the
     prayer." Ibn 'Umar did not find any harm in
     praying it earlier or in delaying it unless he was
     afraid that sleep might overwhelm him and he
     might miss the prayer, and sometimes he used to
     sleep before the 'Isha' prayer. Ibn Juraij said, "I
     said to 'Ata', 'I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying: Once
     Allah's Apostle delayed the 'Isha' prayer to such
     an extent that the people slept and got up and
     slept again and got up again. Then 'Umar bin
     Al-Khattab I, stood up and reminded the
     Prophet I of the prayer.' 'Ata' said, 'Ibn 'Abbas
     said: The Prophet came out as if I was looking at
     him at this time, and water was trickling from his
     head and he was putting his hand on his head and
     then said, 'Hadn't I thought it hard for my
     followers, I would have ordered them to pray
     ('Isha' prayer) at this time.' I asked 'Ata' for
     further information, how the Prophet had kept his
     hand on his head as he was told by Ibn 'Abbas.
     'Ata' separated his fingers slightly and put their
     tips on the side of the head, brought the fingers
     downwards approximating them till the thumb
     touched the lobe of the ear at the side of the
     temple and the beard on the face. He neither
     slowed nor hurried in this action but he acted like
     that. The Prophet said: "Hadn't I thought it hard
     for my followers I would have ordered them to
     pray at this time." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 546: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet delayed the'lsha' prayer till midnight
     and then he offered the prayer and said, "The
     people prayed and slept but you have been in
     prayer as long as you have been waiting for it
     (the prayer)." Anas added: As if I am looking
     now at the glitter of the ring of the Prophet on
     that night. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 547: 

     Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah: 

     We were with the Prophet on a full moon night.
     He looked at the moon and said, "You will
     certainly see your Lord as you see this moon,
     and there will be no trouble in seeing Him. So if
     you can avoid missing (through sleep, business,
     etc.) a prayer before the rising of the sun (Fajr)
     and before its setting ('Asr) you must do so. He
     (the Prophet ) then recited the following verse: 

     And celebrate the praises Of Your Lord before
     The rising of the sun And before (its) setting."
     (50.39) 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 548: 

     Narrated Abu Bakr bin Abi Musa: 

     My father said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'Whoever
     prays the two cool prayers ('Asr and Fajr) will
     go to Paradise.' " 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 549: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Zaid bin Thabit said, "We took the "Suhur" (the
     meal taken before dawn while fasting is
     observed) with the Prophet and then stood up
     for the (morning) prayer." I asked him how long
     the interval between the two (Suhur and prayer)
     was. He replied, 'The interval between the two
     was just sufficient to recite fifty to Sixth 'Ayat." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 550: 

     Narrated Qatada: 

     Anas bin Malik said, "The Prophet and Zaid bin
     Thabit took the 'Suhur' together and after
     finishing the meal, the Prophet stood up and
     prayed (Fajr prayer)." I asked Anas, "How long
     was the interval between finishing their 'Suhur'
     and starting the prayer?" He replied, "The interval
     between the two was just sufficient to recite fifty
     'Ayat." (Verses of the Quran)." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 551: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd: 

     I used to take the "Suhur" meal with my family
     and hasten so as to catch the Fajr (morning
     prayer) with Allah's Apostle 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 552: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The believing women covered with their veiling
     sheets used to attend the Fajr prayer with Allah's
     Apostle, and after finishing the prayer they would
     return to their home and nobody could recognize
     them because of darkness. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 553: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever could get one
     Rak'a (of the Fajr prayer) before sunrise, he has
     got the (morning) prayer and whoever could get
     one Rak'a of the'Asr prayer before sunset, he
     has got the ('Asr) prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 554: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever could get one
     Rak'a of a prayer, (in its proper time) he has got
     the prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 555: 

     Narrated 'Umar: 

     "The Prophet forbade praying after the Fajr
     prayer till the sun rises and after the 'Asr prayer
     till the sun sets." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 556: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Some people told me the same narration (as
     above). 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 557: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'Do not
     pray at the time of sunrise and at the time of
     sunset.' " Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said,
     'If the edge of the sun appears (above the
     horizon) delay the prayer till it becomes high, and
     if the edge of the sun disappears, delay the
     prayer till it sets (disappears completely).' " 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 558: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade two kinds of sales, two
     kinds of dresses, and two prayers. He forbade
     offering prayers after the Fajr prayer till the rising
     of the sun and after the 'Asr prayer till its setting.
     He also forbade "Ishtimal-Assama" and
     "al-Ihtiba" in one garment in such a way that
     one's private parts are exposed towards the sky.
     He also forbade the sales called "Munabadha"
     and "Mulamasa." (See Hadith No. 354 and 355
     Vol. 3). 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 559: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "None of you should try to
     pray at sunrise or sunset." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 560: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri: 

     I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "There is no
     prayer after the morning prayer till the sun rises,
     and there is no prayer after the Asr prayer till the
     sun sets." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 561: 

     Narrated Muawiya: 

     You offer a prayer which I did not see being
     offered by Allah's Apostle when we were in his
     company and he certainly had forbidden it (i.e.
     two Rakat after the Asr prayer). 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 562: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle forbade the offering of two
     prayers: 

     1. after the morning prayer till the sunrises. 

     2. after the 'Asr prayer till the sun sets. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 563: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     I pray as I saw my companions praying. I do not
     forbid praying at any time during the day or night
     except at sunset and sunrise. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 564: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     By Allah, Who took away the Prophet. The
     Prophet never missed them (two Rakat) after the
     'Asr prayer till he met Allah and he did not meet
     Allah till it became heavy for him to pray while
     standing so he used to offer most of the prayers
     while sitting. (She meant the two Rakat after Asr)
     He used to pray them in the house and never
     prayed them in the mosque lest it might be hard
     for his followers and he loved what was easy for
     them . 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 565: 

     Narrated Hisham's father: 

     'Aisha (addressing me) said, "O son of my sister!
     The Prophet never missed two prostrations (i.e.
     Rakat) after the 'Asr prayer in my house." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 566: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle never missed two Rakat before
     the Fajr prayer and after the Asr prayer openly
     and secretly. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 567: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Whenever the Prophet come to me after the 'Asr
     prayer, he always prayed two Rakat. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 568: 

     Narrated Ibn Abu Malih: 

     I was with Buraida on a cloudy day and he said,
     "Offer the 'Asr prayer earlier as the Prophet said,
     'Whoever leaves the 'Asr prayer will have all his
     (good) deeds annulled." (See Hadith No. 527
     and 528) 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 569: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada: 

     My father said, "One night we were traveling
     with the Prophet and some people said, 'We
     wish that Allah's Apostle would take a rest along
     with us during the last hours of the night.' He
     said, 'I am afraid that you will sleep and miss the
     (Fajr) prayer.' Bilal said, 'I will make you get up.'
     So all slept and Bilal rested his back against his
     Rahila and he too was overwhelmed (by sleep)
     and slept. The Prophet got up when the edge of
     the sun had risen and said, 'O Bilal! What about
     your statement?' He replied, 'I have never slept
     such a sleep.' The Prophet said, 'Allah captured
     your souls when He wished, and released them
     when He wished. O Bilal! Get up and pronounce
     the Adhan for the prayer.' The Prophet
     performed ablution and when the sun came up
     and became bright, he stood up and prayed." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 570: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     On the day of Al-Khandaq (the battle of trench.)
     'Umar bin Al-Khattab came cursing the
     disbelievers of Quraish after the sun had set and
     said, "O Allah's Apostle I could not offer the 'Asr
     prayer till the sun had set." The Prophet said, "By
     Allah! I, too, have not prayed." So we turned
     towards Buthan, and the Prophet performed
     ablution and we too performed ablution and
     offered the 'Asr prayer after the sun had set, and
     then he offered the Maghrib prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 571: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "If anyone forgets a prayer he
     should pray that prayer when he remembers it.
     There is no expiation except to pray the same."
     Then he recited: "Establish prayer for My (i.e.
     Allah's) remembrance." (20.14). 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 572: 

     Narrated Jabir: 

     Umar came cursing the disbelievers (of Quraish)
     on the day of Al-Khandaq (the battle of Trench)
     and said, "I could not offer the 'Asr prayer till the
     sun had set. Then we went to Buthan and he
     offered the ('Asr) prayer after sunset and then he
     offered the Maghrib prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 573: 

     Narrated Abu-l-Minhal: 

     My father and I went to Abi Barza Al-Aslami
     and my father said to him, "Tell us how Allah's
     Apostle used to offer the compulsory
     congregational prayers." He said, "He used to
     pray the Zuhr prayer, which you call the first
     prayer, as the sun declined at noon, the 'Asr at a
     time when one of US could go to his family at the
     farthest place in Medina while the sun was still
     hot. (The narrator forgot what Abu Barza had
     said about the Maghrib prayer), and the Prophet
     preferred to pray the 'Isha' late and disliked to
     sleep before it or talk after it. And he used to
     return after finishing the morning prayer at such a
     time when it was possible for one to recognize
     the person sitting by his side and he (the Prophet)
     used to recite 60 to 100 'Ayat' (verses) of the
     Qur'an in it." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 574: 

     Narrated Qurra bin Khalid: 

     Once he waited for Al-Hasan and he did not
     show up till it was about the usual time for him to
     start his speech; then he came and apologized
     saying, "Our neighbors invited us." Then he
     added, "Narrated Anas, 'Once we waited for the
     Prophet till it was midnight or about midnight. He
     came and led the prayer, and after finishing it, he
     addressed us and said, 'All the people prayed
     and then slept and you had been in prayer as
     long as you were waiting for it." Al-Hasan said,
     "The people are regarded as performing good
     deeds as long as they are waiting for doing good
     deeds." Al-Hasan's statement is a portion of
     Anas's Hadith from the Prophet . 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 575: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     The Prophet prayed one of the'lsha' prayer in his
     last days and after finishing it with Taslim, he
     stood up and said, "Do you realize (the
     importance of) this night? Nobody present on the

     surface of the earth to-night would be living after
     the completion of one hundred years from this
     night." 

     The people made a mistake in grasping the
     meaning of this statement of Allah's Apostle and
     they indulged in those things which are said about
     these narrators (i.e. some said that the Day of
     Resurrection will be established after 100 years
     etc.) But the Prophet said, "Nobody present on
     the surface of earth tonight would be living after
     the completion of 100 years from this night"; he
     meant "When that century (people of that
     century) would pass away." 


Volume 1, Book 10, Number 576: 

     Narrated Abu 'Uthman: 

     'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Bakr said, "The Suffa
     Companions were poor people and the Prophet
     said, 'Whoever has food for two persons should
     take a third one from them (Suffa companions).
     And whosoever has food for four persons he
     should take one or two from them' Abu Bakr
     took three men and the Prophet took ten of
     them." 

     'Abdur Rahman added, my father my mother and
     I were there (in the house). (The sub-narrator is
     in doubt whether 'Abdur Rahman also said, 'My
     wife and our servant who was common for both
     my house and Abu Bakr's house). Abu Bakr
     took his supper with the Prophet and remained
     there till the 'Isha' prayer was offered. Abu Bakr
     went back and stayed with the Prophet till the
     Prophet took his meal and then Abu Bakr
     returned to his house after a long portion of the
     night had passed. Abu Bakr's wife said, 'What
     detained you from your guests (or guest)?' He
     said, 'Have you not served them yet?' She said,
     'They refused to eat until you come. The food
     was served for them but they refused." 'Abdur
     Rahman added, "I went away and hid myself
     (being afraid of Abu Bakr) and in the meantime
     he (Abu Bakr) called me, 'O Ghunthar (a harsh
     word)!' and also called me bad names and
     abused me and then said (to his family), 'Eat. No
     welcome for you.' Then (the supper was served).
     Abu Bakr took an oath that he would not eat that
     food. The narrator added: By Allah, whenever
     any one of us (myself and the guests of Suffa
     companions) took anything from the food, it
     increased from underneath. We all ate to our fill
     and the food was more than it was before its
     serving. 

     Abu Bakr looked at it (the food) and found it as
     it was before serving or even more than that. He
     addressed his wife (saying) 'O the sister of Bani
     Firas! What is this?' She said, 'O the pleasure of
     my eyes! The food is now three times more than
     it was before.' Abu Bakr ate from it, and said,
     'That (oath) was from Satan' meaning his oath
     (not to eat). Then he again took a morsel
     (mouthful) from it and then took the rest of it to
     the Prophet. So that meal was with the Prophet.
     There was a treaty between us and some people,
     and when the period of that treaty had elapsed
     the Prophet divided us into twelve (groups) (the
     Prophet's companions) each being headed by a
     man. Allah knows how many men were under
     the command of each (leader). So all of them (12
     groups of men) ate of that meal." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 11: 

   Call to Prayers (Adhaan) 



Volume 1, Book 11, Number 577: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The people mentioned the fire and the bell (they
     suggested those as signals to indicate the starting
     of prayers), and by that they mentioned the Jews
     and the Christians. Then Bilal was ordered to
     pronounce Adhan for the prayer by saying its
     wordings twice, and for the Iqama (the call for
     the actual standing for the prayers in rows) by
     saying its wordings once. (Iqama is pronounced
     when the people are ready for the prayer). 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 578: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     When the Muslims arrived at Medina, they used
     to assemble for the prayer, and used to guess the
     time for it. During those days, the practice of
     Adhan for the prayers had not been introduced
     yet. Once they discussed this problem regarding
     the call for prayer. Some people suggested the
     use of a bell like the Christians, others proposed
     a trumpet like the horn used by the Jews, but
     'Umar was the first to suggest that a man should
     call (the people) for the prayer; so Allah's
     Apostle ordered Bilal to get up and pronounce
     the Adhan for prayers. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 579: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Bilal was ordered to repeat the wording of the
     Adhan for prayers twice, and to pronounce the
     wording of the Iqamas once except
     "Qad-qamat-is-Salat". 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 580: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     When the number of Muslims increased they
     discussed the question as to how to know the
     time for the prayer by some familiar means.
     Some suggested that a fire be lit (at the time of
     the prayer) and others put forward the proposal
     to ring the bell. Bilal was ordered to pronounce
     the wording of Adhan twice and of the Iqama
     once only. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 581: 

     Narrated Abu Qilaba: 

     Anas said, "Bilal was ordered to pronounce the
     wording of Adhan twice and of Iqama once
     only." The sub narrator Isma'li said, "I mentioned
     that to Aiyub and he added (to that), "Except
     Iqama (i.e. Qad-Qamatis-Salat which should be
     said twice)." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 582: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When the Adhan is
     pronounced Satan takes to his heels and passes
     wind with noise during his flight in order not to
     hear the Adhan. When the Adhan is completed
     he comes back and again takes to his heels when
     the Iqama is pronounced and after its completion
     he returns again till he whispers into the heart of
     the person (to divert his attention from his
     prayer) and makes him remember things which
     he does not recall to his mind before the prayer
     and that causes him to forget how much he has
     prayed." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 583: 

     Narrated 'Abdul Rahman: 

     Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri told my father, "I see you
     liking sheep and the wilderness. So whenever
     you are with your sheep or in the wilderness and
     you want to pronounce Adhan for the prayer
     raise your voice in doing so, for whoever hears
     the Adhan, whether a human being, a jinn or any
     other creature, will be a witness for you on the
     Day of Resurrection." Abu Said added, "I heard
     it (this narration) from Allah's Apostle." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 584: 

     Narrated Humaid: 

     Anas bin Malik said, "Whenever the Prophet
     went out with us to fight (in Allah's cause) against
     any nation, he never allowed us to attack till
     morning and he would wait and see: if he heard
     Adhan he would postpone the attack and if he
     did not hear Adhan he would attack them." Anas
     added, "We reached Khaibar at night and in the
     morning when he did not hear the Adhan for the
     prayer, he (the Prophet ) rode and I rode behind
     Abi Talha and my foot was touching that of the
     Prophet. 

     The inhabitants of Khaibar came out with their
     baskets and spades and when they saw the
     Prophet they shouted 'Muhammad! By Allah,
     Muhammad and his army.' When Allah's Apostle
     saw them, he said, "Allahu-Akbar!
     Allahu-Akbar! Khaibar is ruined. Whenever we
     approach a (hostile) nation (to fight), then evil will
     be the morning of those who have been warned."


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 585: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whenever you hear the
     Adhan, say what the Mu'adhdhin is saying. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 586: 

     Narrated 'Isa bin Talha: 

     that he had heard Muawiya repeating the words
     of Adhan up to "Wa ash-hadu Anna
     Muhammadan Rasulul-lah (and I testify that
     Muhammad is Allah's Apostle.)" 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 587: 

     Narrated Yahya as above (586) and added: 

     "Some of my companions told me that Hisham
     had said, "When the Mu'adhdhin said, "Haiya
     alas-sala(t) (come for the prayer)." Muawiya
     said, "La hawla wala quwata illa billah (There is
     neither might nor any power except with Allah)"
     and added, "We heard your Prophet saying the
     same." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 588: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever after listening to
     the Adhan says, 'Allahumma Rabba
     hadhihi-d-da' watit-tammati was-salatil qa'imati,
     ati Muhammadan al-wasilata wal-fadilata, wab'
     athhu maqaman mahmudan-il-ladhi wa' adtahu
     (O Allah! Lord of this perfect call (of not
     ascribing partners to You) and of the regular
     prayer which is going to be established! Kindly
     give Muhammad the right of intercession and
     superiority and send him (on the Day of
     Judgment) to the best and the highest place in
     Paradise which You promised him)', then
     intercession for me will be permitted for him on
     the Day of Resurrection"). 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 589: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If the people knew the
     reward for pronouncing the Adhan and for
     standing in the first row (in congregational
     prayers) and found no other way to get that
     except by drawing lots they would draw lots, and
     if they knew the reward of the Zuhr prayer (in the
     early moments of its stated time) they would race
     for it (go early) and if they knew the reward of
     'Isha' and Fajr (morning) prayers in congregation,
     they would come to offer them even if they had
     to crawl." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 590: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Al-Harith: 

     Once on a rainy muddy day, Ibn 'Abbas
     delivered a sermon in our presence and when the
     Mu'adhdhin pronounced the Adhan and said,
     "Haiya ala-s-sala(t) (come for the prayer)" Ibn
     'Abbas ordered him to say 'Pray at your homes.'
     The people began to look at each other
     (surprisingly). Ibn 'Abbas said. "It was done by
     one who was much better than I (i.e. the Prophet
     or his Mu'adhdhin), and it is a license.' 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 591: 

     Narrated Salim bin Abdullah: 

     My father said that Allah s Apostle said, "Bilal
     pronounces 'Adhan at night, so keep on eating
     and drinking (Suhur) till Ibn Um Maktum
     pronounces Adhan." Salim added, "He was a
     blind man who would not pronounce the Adhan
     unless he was told that the day had dawned." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 592: 

     Narrated Hafsa: 

     When the Muadh-dhin pronounced the Adhan
     for Fajr prayer and the dawn became evident the
     Prophet ordered a two Rakat light prayer
     (Sunna) before the Iqama of the compulsory
     (congregational) prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 593: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to offer two light Rakat
     between the Adhan and the Iqama of the Fajr
     prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 594: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Bilal pronounces the
     Adhan at night, so keep on eating and drinking
     (Suhur) till Ibn Um Maktum pronounces the
     Adhan." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 595: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud: 

     The Prophet said, "The Adhan pronounced by
     Bilal should not stop you from taking Suhur, for
     he pronounces the Adhan at night, so that the
     one offering the late night prayer (Tahajjud) from
     among you might hurry up and the sleeping from
     among you might wake up. It does not mean that
     dawn or morning has started." Then he (the
     Prophet) pointed with his fingers and raised them
     up (towards the sky) and then lowered them
     (towards the earth) like this (Ibn Mas'ud imitated
     the gesture of the Prophet). Az-Zuhri gestured
     with his two index fingers which he put on each
     other and then stretched them to the right and
     left. These gestures illustrate the way real dawn
     appears. It spreads left and right horizontally.
     The dawn that appears in the high sky and
     lowers down is not the real dawn) . 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 596: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "Bilal pronounces the Adhan
     at night, so eat and drink (Suhur) till Ibn Um
     Maktum pronounces the Adhan." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 597: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal Al-Muzani: 

     Allah's Apostle said thrice, "There is a prayer
     between the two Adhans (Adhan and Iqama),"
     and added, "For the one who wants to pray." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 598: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     "When the Mu'adhdhin pronounced the Adhan,
     some of the companions of the Prophet would
     proceed to the pillars of the mosque (for the
     prayer) till the Prophet arrived and in this way
     they used to pray two Rakat before the Maghrib
     prayer. There used to be a little time between the
     Adhan and the Iqama." Shu'ba said, "There used
     to be a very short interval between the two
     (Adhan and Iqama)." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 599: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to pray two light Rakat
     before the morning (compulsory) prayer after the
     day dawned and the Mu'adhdhin had finished his
     Adhan. He then would lie on his right side till the
     Mu'adhdhin came to pronounce the Iqama. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 600: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal: 

     The prophet said, "There is a prayer between the
     two Adhans (Adhan and Iqama), there is a
     prayer between the two Adhans." And then while
     saying it the third time he added, "For the one
     who wants to (pray)." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 601: 

     Narrated Malik bin Huwairth: 

     I came to the Prophet with some men from my
     tribe and stayed with him for twenty nights. He
     was kind and merciful to us. When he realized
     our longing for our families, he said to us, "Go
     back and stay with your families and teach them
     the religion, and offer the prayer and one of you
     should pronounce the Adhan for the prayer when
     its time is due and the oldest one amongst you
     should lead the prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 602: 

     Narrated Abu Dhar: 

     We were in the company of the Prophet on a
     journey and the Mu'adhdhin wanted to
     pronounce the Adhan for the (Zuhr) prayer. The
     Prophet said to him, "Let it become cooler."
     Then he again wanted to pronounce the Adhan
     but the Prophet; said to him, "Let it become
     cooler." The Mu'adh-dhin again wanted to
     pronounce the Adhan for the prayer but the
     Prophet said, "Let it become cooler," till the
     shadows of the hillocks become equal to their
     sizes. The Prophet added, "The severity of the
     heat is from the raging of Hell." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 603: 

     Narrated Malik bin Huwairth: 

     Two men came to the Prophet with the intention
     of a journey. The Prophet said, "When (both of)
     you set out, pronounce Adhan and then Iqama
     and the oldest of you should lead the prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 604: 

     Narrated Malik: 

     We came to the Prophet and stayed with him for
     twenty days and nights. We were all young and
     of about the same age. The Prophet was very
     kind and merciful. When he realized our longing
     for our families, he asked about our homes and
     the people there and we told him. Then he asked
     us to go back to our families and stay with them
     and teach them (the religion) and to order them
     to do good things. He also mentioned some other
     things which I have (remembered or) forgotten.
     The Prophet then added, "Pray as you have seen
     me praying and when it is the time for the prayer
     one of you should pronounce the Adhan and the
     oldest of you should lead the prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 605: 

     Narrated Nafi: 

     Once in a cold night, Ibn 'Umar pronounced the
     Adhan for the prayer at ,Dajnan (the name of a
     mountain) and then said, "Pray at your homes",
     and informed us that Allah's Apostle used to tell
     the Mu'adhdin to pronounce Adhan and say,
     "Pray at your homes" at the end of the Adhan on
     a rainy or a very cold night during the journey." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 606: 

     Narrated 'Aun bin Abi Juhaifa: 

     My father said, "I saw Allah's Apostle at a place
     called Al-Abtah. Bilal came and informed him
     about the prayer and then came out with an Anza
     and planted it in front of Allah's Apostle at
     Al-Abtah and pronounced the Iqama." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 607: 

     Narrated 'Aun bin Abi Juhaifa: 

     My father said, "I saw Bilal turning his face from
     side to side while pronouncing the Adhan for the
     prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 608: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada: 

     My father said, "While we were praying with the
     Prophet he heard the noise of some people.
     After the prayer he said, 'What is the matter?'
     They replied 'We were hurrying for the prayer.'
     He said, 'Do not make haste for the prayer, and
     whenever you come for the prayer, you should
     come with calmness, and pray whatever you get
     (with the people) and complete the rest which
     you have missed." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 609: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "When you hear the Iqama,
     proceed to offer the prayer with calmness and
     solemnity and do not make haste. And pray
     whatever you are able to pray and complete
     whatever you have missed. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 610: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada: 

     My father said. "Allah's Apostle said, 'If the
     Iqama is pronounced then do not stand for the
     prayer till you see me (in front of you).' " 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 611: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi: 

     Qatada, My father said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'If
     the Iqama is pronounced, then do not stand for
     the prayer till you see me (in front of you) and do
     it calmly.' " 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 612: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle went out (of the mosque) when
     the Iqama had been pronounced and the rows
     straightened. The Prophet stood at his Musalla
     (praying place) and we waited for the Prophet to
     begin the prayer with Takbir. He left and asked
     us to remain in our places. We kept on standing
     till the Prophet returned and the water was
     trickling from his head for he had taken a bath (of
     Janaba). 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 613: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Once iqama was pronounced and the people had
     straightened the rows, Allah's Apostle went
     forward (to lead the prayer) but he was Junub,
     so he said, "Remain in your places." And he went
     out, took a bath and returned with water trickling
     from his head. Then he led the prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 614: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     On the day of Al-Khandaq (the trench), 'Umar
     bin Al-Khattab went to the Prophet and said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! By Allah, I could not pray (the
     'Asr) till the sun had set." 'Umar told this to the
     Prophet at the time when a fasting person had
     done Iftar (taken his meals). The Prophet then
     went to Buthan and I was with him. He
     performed ablution and offered the 'Asr prayer
     after the sun had set and then the Maghrib
     prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 615: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     Once the Iqama was pronounced and the
     Prophet was talking to a man (in a low voice) in
     a corner of the mosque and he did not lead the
     prayer till (some of) the people had slept (dozed
     in a sitting posture) . 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 616: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once Iqama was pronounced a man came to the
     Prophet and detained him (from the prayer). 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 617: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hand
     my soul is I was about to order for collecting
     fire-wood (fuel) and then order Someone to
     pronounce the Adhan for the prayer and then
     order someone to lead the prayer then I would
     go from behind and burn the houses of men who
     did not present themselves for the (compulsory
     congregational) prayer. By Him, in Whose
     Hands my soul is, if anyone of them had known
     that he would get a bone covered with good
     meat or two (small) pieces of meat present in
     between two ribs, he would have turned up for
     the 'Isha' prayer.' 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 618: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The prayer in congregation
     is twenty seven times superior to the prayer
     offered by person alone." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 619: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet said, "The prayer in congregation is
     twenty five times superior to the prayer offered
     by person alone." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 620: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The reward of the prayer
     offered by a person in congregation is twenty five
     times greater than that of the prayer offered in
     one's house or in the market (alone). And this is
     because if he performs ablution and does it
     perfectly and then proceeds to the mosque with
     the sole intention of praying, then for every step
     he takes towards the mosque, he is upgraded
     one degree in reward and his one sin is taken off
     (crossed out) from his accounts (of deeds).
     When he offers his prayer, the angels keep on
     asking Allah's Blessings and Allah's forgiveness
     for him as long as he is (staying) at his Musalla.
     They say, 'O Allah! Bestow Your blessings upon
     him, be Merciful and kind to him.' And one is
     regarded in prayer as long as one is waiting for
     the prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 621: 

     Narrated Abu Salama bin 'Abdur Rahman: 

     Abu Huraira said, "I heard Allah's Apostle
     saying, 'The reward of a prayer in congregation is
     twenty five times greater than that of a prayer
     offered by a person alone. The angels of the night
     and the angels of the day gather at the time of
     Fajr prayer.' " Abu Huraira then added, "Recite
     the Holy Book if you wish, for "Indeed, the
     recitation of the Qur'an in the early dawn (Fajr
     prayer) is ever witnessed." (17.18). 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: The reward of the
     congregational prayer is twenty seven times
     greater (than that of the prayer offered by a
     person alone). 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 622: 

     Narrated Salim: 

     I heard Um Ad-Darda' saying, "Abu Ad-Darda'
     entered the house in an angry mood. I said to
     him. 'What makes you angry?' He replied, 'By
     Allah! I do not find the followers of Muhammad
     doing those good things (which they used to do
     before) except the offering of congregational
     prayer." (This happened in the last days of Abu
     Ad-Darda' during the rule of 'Uthman) . 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 623: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     The Prophet said, "The people who get
     tremendous reward for the prayer are those who
     are farthest away (from the mosque) and then
     those who are next farthest and so on. Similarly
     one who waits to pray with the Imam has greater
     reward than one who prays and goes to bed. " 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 624: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "While a man was going on
     a way, he saw a thorny branch and removed it
     from the way and Allah became pleased by his
     action and forgave him for that." Then the
     Prophet said, "Five are martyrs: One who dies of
     plague, one who dies of an abdominal disease,
     one who dies of drowning, one who is buried
     alive (and) dies and one who is killed in Allah's
     cause." (The Prophet further said, "If the people
     knew the reward for pronouncing the Adhan and
     for standing in the first row (in the congregational
     prayer) and found no other way to get it except
     by drawing lots they would do so, and if they
     knew the reward of offering the Zuhr prayer
     early (in its stated time), they would race for it
     and they knew the reward for 'Isha' and Fajr
     prayers in congregation, they would attend them
     even if they were to crawl') 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 625: 

     Narrated Humaid: 

     Anas said, "The Prophet said, 'O Bani Salima!
     Don't you think that for every step of yours (that
     you take towards the mosque) there is a reward
     (while coming for prayer)?" Mujahid said:
     "Regarding Allah's Statement: "We record that
     which they have sent before (them), and their
     traces" (36.12). 'Their traces' means 'their steps.'
     " And Anas said that the people of Bani Salima
     wanted to shift to a place near the Prophet but
     Allah's Apostle disliked the idea of leaving their
     houses uninhabited and said, "Don't you think
     that you will get the reward for your footprints."
     Mujahid said, "Their foot prints mean their foot
     steps and their going on foot." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 626: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "No prayer is harder for the
     hypocrites than the Fajr and the 'Isha' prayers
     and if they knew the reward for these prayers at
     their respective times, they would certainly
     present themselves (in the mosques) even if they
     had to c awl." The Prophet added, "Certainly I
     decided to order the Mu'adh-dhin (call-maker)
     to pronounce Iqama and order a man to lead the
     prayer and then take a fire flame to burn all those
     who had not left their houses so far for the prayer
     along with their houses." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 627: 

     Narrated Malik bin Huwairith: 

     Prophet said (to two persons), "Whenever the
     prayer time becomes due, you should pronounce
     Adhan and then Iqama and the older of you
     should lead the prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 628: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "The angels keep on asking
     for Allah's Blessing and Forgiveness for anyone
     of you as long as he is at his Musalla (praying
     place) and does not do Hadath (passes wind).
     The angels say, 'O Allah! Forgive him and be
     Merciful to him.' Each one of you is in the prayer
     as long as he is waiting for the prayer and nothing
     but the prayer detains him from going to his
     family." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 629: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah will give shade, to
     seven, on the Day when there will be no shade
     but His. (These seven persons are) a just ruler, a
     youth who has been brought up in the worship of
     Allah (i.e. worships Allah sincerely from
     childhood), a man whose heart is attached to the
     mosques (i.e. to pray the compulsory prayers in
     the mosque in congregation), two persons who
     love each other only for Allah's sake and they
     meet and part in Allah's cause only, a man who
     refuses the call of a charming woman of noble
     birth for illicit intercourse with her and says: I am
     afraid of Allah, a man who gives charitable gifts
     so secretly that his left hand does not know what
     his right hand has given (i.e. nobody knows how
     much he has given in charity), and a person who
     remembers Allah in seclusion and his eyes are
     then flooded with tears." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 630: 

     Narrated Humaid: 

     Anas was asked, "Did Allah's Apostle wear a
     ring?" He said, "Yes. Once he delayed the 'Isha'
     prayer till mid-night and after the prayer, he
     faced us and said, 'The people prayed and have
     slept and you remained in prayer as long as you
     waited for it.' " Anas added, "As if I were just
     now observing the glitter of his ring." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 631: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Allah will prepare for him
     who goes to the mosque (every) morning and in
     the afternoon (for the congregational prayer) an
     honorable place in Paradise with good hospitality
     for (what he has done) every morning and
     afternoon goings. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 632: 

     Narrated Malik Ibn Buhaina: 

     Allah's Apostle passed by a man praying two
     Rakat after the Iqama (had been pronounced).
     When Allah's Apostle completed the prayer, the
     people gathered around him (the Prophet) or that
     man and Allah's Apostle said to him (protesting),
     Are there four Rakat in Fajr prayer? Are there
     four Rakat in Fajr prayer?" 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 633: 

     Narrated Al-Aswad: 

     "We were with 'Aisha discussing the regularity of
     offering the prayer and dignifying it. She said,
     'When Allah's Apostle fell sick with the fatal
     illness and when the time of prayer became due
     and Adhan was pronounced, he said, 'Tell Abu
     Bakr to lead the people in prayer.' He was told
     that Abu Bakr was a soft-hearted man and
     would not be able to lead the prayer in his place.
     The Prophet gave the same order again but he
     was given the same reply. He gave the order for
     the third time and said, 'You (women) are the
     companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the
     prayer.' So Abu Bakr came out to lead the
     prayer. In the meantime the condition of the
     Prophet improved a bit and he came out with the
     help of two men one on each side. As if I was
     observing his legs dragging on the ground owing
     to the disease. Abu Bakr wanted to retreat but
     the Prophet beckoned him to remain at his place
     and the Prophet was brought till he sat beside
     Abu Bakr." Al-A'mash was asked, "Was the
     Prophet praying and Abu Bakr following him,
     and were the people following Abu Bakr in that
     prayer?" Al-A'mash replied in the affirmative with
     a nod of his head. Abu Muawiya said, "The
     Prophet was sitting on the left side of Abu Bakr
     who was praying while standing." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 634: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     "When the Prophet became seriously ill and his
     disease became aggravated he asked for
     permission from his wives to be nursed in my
     house and he was allowed. He came out with the
     help of two men and his legs were dragging on
     the ground. He was between Al-Abbas and
     another man." 

     'Ubaid Ullah said, "I told Ibn 'Abbas what 'Aisha
     had narrated and he said, 'Do you know who
     was the (second) man whose name 'Aisha did
     not mention'" I said, 'No.' Ibn 'Abbas said, 'He
     was 'Ali Ibn Abi Talib.' " 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 635: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Once on a very cold and stormy night, Ibn 'Umar
     pronounced the Adhan for the prayer and then
     said, "Pray in your homes." He (Ibn 'Umar)
     added. "On very cold and rainy nights Allah's
     Apostle used to order the Mu'adhdhin to say,
     'Pray in your homes.' " 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 636: 

     Narrated Mahmuid bin Rabi' Al-Ansari: 

     'Itban bin Malik used to lead his people (tribe) in
     prayer and was a blind man, he said to Allah's
     Apostle , "O Allah's Apostle! At times it is dark
     and flood water is flowing (in the valley) and I am
     blind man, so please pray at a place in my house
     so that I can take it as a Musalla (praying
     place)." So Allah's Apostle went to his house and
     said, "Where do you like me to pray?" 'Itban
     pointed to a place in his house and Allah's
     Apostle, offered the prayer there. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 637: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Al-Harith: 

     Ibn Abbas addressed us on a (rainy and) muddy
     day and when the Mu'adh-dhin said, "Come for
     the prayer" Ibn 'Abbas ordered him to say, "Pray
     in your homes." The people began to look at one
     another with surprise as if they did not like it. Ibn
     'Abbas said, "It seems that you thought ill of it
     but no doubt it was done by one who was better
     than I (i.e. the Prophet). It (the prayer) is a strict
     order and I disliked to bring you out." 

     Ibn 'Abbas narrated the same as above but he
     said, "I did not like you to make you sinful (in
     refraining from coming to the mosque) and to
     come (to the mosque) covered with mud up to
     the knees." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 638: 

     Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri: 

     A cloud came and it rained till the roof started
     leaking and in those days the roof used to be of
     the branches of date-palms. Iqama was
     pronounced and I saw Allah's Apostles
     prostrating in water and mud and even I saw the
     mark of mud on his forehead. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 639: 

     Narrated Anas bin Sirin: 

     I heard Anas saying, "A man from Ansar said to
     the Prophet, 'I cannot pray with you (in
     congregation).' He was a very fat man and he
     prepared a meal for the Prophet and invited him
     to his house. He spread out a mat for the
     Prophet, and washed one of its sides with water,
     and the Prophet prayed two Rakat on it." A man
     from the family of Al-Jaruid asked, "Did the
     Prophet used to pray the Duha (forenoon)
     prayer?" Anas said, "I did not see him praying
     the Duha prayer except on that day." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 640: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet said, "If supper is served, and
     Iqama is pronounced one should start with the
     supper." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 641: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If the supper is served start
     having it before praying the Maghrib prayer and
     do not be hasty in finishing it." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 642: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Ibn 'Umar said, "Allah's Apostle said, 'If the
     supper is served for anyone of you and the
     Iqama is pronounced, start with the supper and
     don't be in haste (and carry on eating) till you
     finish it." If food was served for Ibn 'Umar and
     Iqama was pronounced, he never came to the
     prayer till he finished it (i.e. food) in spite of the
     fact that he heard the recitation (of the Qur'an)
     by the Imam (in the prayer). Narrated Ibn 'Umar:
     The Prophet said, "If anyone of you is having his
     meals, he should not hurry up till he is; satisfied
     even if the prayer has been started." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 643: 

     Narrated Ja'far bin 'Amr bin Umaiya: 

     My father said, "I saw Allah's Apostle eating a
     piece of meat from the shoulder of a sheep and
     he was called for the prayer. He stood up, put
     down the knife and prayed but did not perform
     ablutilon.'' 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 644: 

     Narrated Al-Aswad: 

     That he asked 'Aisha "What did the Prophet use
     to do in his house?" She replied, "He used to
     keep himself busy serving his family and when it
     was the time for prayer he would go for it." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 645: 

     Narrated Aiyub: 

     Abu Qilaba said, "Malik bin Huwairith came to
     this Mosque of ours and said, 'I pray in front of
     you and my aim is not to lead the prayer but to
     show you the way in which the Prophet used to
     pray.' " I asked Abu Qilaba,"How did he use to
     pray?' " He replied, "(The Prophet used to pray)
     like this Sheikh of ours and the Sheikh used to sit
     for a while after the prostration, before getting up
     after the first Rak'a. " 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 646: 

     Narrated Abu Musa: 

     "The Prophet became sick and when his disease
     became aggravated, he said, "Tell Abu Bakr to
     lead the prayer." 'Aisha said, "He is a
     soft-hearted man and would not be able to lead
     the prayer in your place." The Prophet said
     again, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in
     prayer." She repeated the same reply but he said,
     "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer. You
     are the companions of Joseph." So the
     messenger went to Abu Bakr (with that order)
     and he led the people in prayer in the lifetime of
     the Prophet. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 647: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     the mother of the believers: Allah's Apostle in his
     illness said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in
     prayer." I said to him, "If Abu Bakr stands in
     your place, the people would not hear him owing
     to his (excessive) weeping. So please order
     'Umar to lead the prayer." 'Aisha added I said to
     Hafsa, "Say to him: If Abu Bakr should lead the
     people in the prayer in your place, the people
     would not be able to hear him owing to his
     weeping; so please, order 'Umar to lead the
     prayer." Hafsa did so but Allah's Apostle said,
     "Keep quiet! You are verily the Companions of
     Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the
     prayer. " Hafsa said to 'Aisha, "I never got
     anything good from you." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 648: 

     Narrated Az-Zuhn: 

     Anas bin Malik Al-Ansari, told me, "Abu Bakr
     used to lead the people in prayer during the fatal
     illness of the Prophet till it was Monday. When
     the people aligned (in rows) for the prayer the
     Prophet lifted the curtain of his house and started
     looking at us and was standing at that time. His
     face was (glittering) like a page of the Qur'an and
     he smiled cheerfully. We were about to be put to
     trial for the pleasure of seeing the Prophet, Abu
     Bakr retreated to join the row as he thought that
     the Prophet would lead the prayer. The Prophet
     beckoned us to complete the prayer and he let
     the curtain fall. On the same day he died." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 649: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet did not come out for three days.
     The people stood for the prayer and Abu Bakr
     went ahead to lead the prayer. (In the meantime)
     the Prophet caught hold of the curtain and lifted
     it. When the face of the Prophet appeared we
     had never seen a scene more pleasing than the
     face of the Prophet as it appeared then. The
     Prophet beckoned to Abu Bakr to lead the
     people in the prayer and then let the curtain fall.
     We did not see him (again) till he died. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 650: 

     Narrated Hamza bin 'Abdullah: 

     My father said, "When Allah's Apostle became
     seriously ill, he was told about the prayer. He
     said, 'Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the
     prayer.' 'Aisha said, 'Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted
     man and he would be over-powered by his
     weeping if he recited the Qur'an.' He said to
     them, 'Tell him (Abu Bakr) to lead the prayer.
     The same reply was given to him. He said again,
     'Tell him to lead the prayer. You (women) are
     the companions of Joseph." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 651: 

     Narrated 'Urwa's father: 

     'Aisha said, "Allah's Apostle ordered Abu Bakr
     to lead the people in the prayer during his illness
     and so he led them in prayer." 'Urwa, a sub
     narrator, added, "Allah's Apostle felt a bit
     relieved and came out and Abu Bakr was leading
     the people. When Abu Bakr saw the Prophet he
     retreated but the Prophet beckoned him to
     remain there. Allah's Apostle sat beside Abu
     Bakr. Abu Bakr was following the prayer of
     Allah's Apostle and the people were following
     the prayer of Abu Bakr." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 652: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd As-Sa'idi: 

     Allah's Apostle went to establish peace among
     Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf. In the meantime the time of
     prayer was due and the Mu'adh-dhin went to
     Abu Bakr and said, "Will you lead the prayer, so
     that I may pronounce the Iqama?" Abu Bakr
     replied in the affirmative and led the prayer.
     Allah's Apostle came while the people were still
     praying and he entered the rows of the praying
     people till he stood in the (first row). The people
     clapped their hands. Abu Bakr never glanced
     sideways in his prayer but when the people
     continued clapping, Abu Bakr looked and saw
     Allah's Apostle. Allah's Apostle beckoned him to
     stay at his place. Abu Bakr raised his hands and
     thanked Allah for that order of Allah's Apostle
     and then he retreated till he reached the first row.
     Allah's Apostle went forward and led the prayer.
     When Allah's Apostle finished the prayer, he
     said, "O Abu Bakr! What prevented you from
     staying when I ordered you to do so?" 

     Abu Bakr replied, "How can Ibn Abi Quhafa
     (Abu Bakr) dare to lead the prayer in the
     presence of Allah's Apostle?" Then Allah's
     Apostle said, "Why did you clap so much? If
     something happens to anyone during his prayer
     he should say Subhan Allah. If he says so he will
     be attended to, for clapping is for women." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 653: 

     Narrated Malik bin Huwairth: 

     We went to the Prophet and we were all young
     men and stayed with him for about twenty nights.
     The Prophet was very merciful. He said, "When
     you return home, impart religious teachings to
     your families and tell them to offer perfectly such
     and such a prayer at such and such a time and
     such and such a prayer at such and such a time.
     And al the time of the prayer one of you should
     pronounce the Adhan and the oldest of you
     should lead the prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 654: 

     Narrated Itban bin Malik Al-Ansari: 

     The Prophet (came to my house and) asked
     permission for entering and I allowed him. He
     asked, "Where do you like me to pray in your
     house?" I pointed to a place which I liked. He
     stood up for prayer and we aligned behind him
     and he finished the prayer with Taslim and we
     did the same. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 655: 

     Narrated 'Ubaid-Ullah Ibn 'Abdullah bin 'Utba: 

     I went to 'Aisha and asked her to describe to me
     the illness of Allah's Apostle. 'Aisha said, "Yes.
     The Prophet became seriously ill and asked
     whether the people had prayed. We replied,
     'No. O Allah's Apostle! They are waiting for
     you.' He added, 'Put water for me in a trough."
     'Aisha added, "We did so. He took a bath and
     tried to get up but fainted. When he recovered,
     he again asked whether the people had prayed.
     We said, 'No, they are waiting for you. O Allah's
     Apostle,' He again said, 'Put water in a trough for
     me.' He sat down and took a bath and tried to
     get up but fainted again. Then he recovered and
     said, 'Have the people prayed?' We replied, 'No,
     they are waiting for you. O Allah's Apostle.' He
     said, 'Put water for me in the trough.' Then he sat
     down and washed himself and tried to get up but
     he fainted. When he recovered, he asked, 'Have
     the people prayed?' We said, 'No, they are
     waiting for you. O Allah's Apostle! The people
     were in the mosque waiting for the Prophet for
     the 'Isha prayer. The Prophet sent for Abu Bakr
     to lead the people in the prayer. The messenger
     went to Abu Bakr and said, 'Allah's Apostle
     orders you to lead the people in the prayer.' Abu
     Bakr was a soft-hearted man, so he asked 'Umar
     to lead the prayer but 'Umar replied, 'You are
     more rightful.' So Abu Bakr led the prayer in
     those days. When the Prophet felt a bit better, he
     came out for the Zuhr prayer with the help of two
     persons one of whom was Al-'Abbas. while Abu
     Bakr was leading the people in the prayer. When
     Abu Bakr saw him he wanted to retreat but the
     Prophet beckoned him not to do so and asked
     them to make him sit beside Abu Bakr and they
     did so. Abu Bakr was following the Prophet (in
     the prayer) and the people were following Abu
     Bakr. The Prophet (prayed) sitting." 

     'Ubaid-Ullah added "I went to 'Abdullah bin
     'Abbas and asked him, Shall I tell you what
     Aisha has told me about the fatal illness of the
     Prophet?' Ibn 'Abbas said, 'Go ahead. I told him
     her narration and he did not deny anything of it
     but asked whether 'Aisha told me the name of
     the second person (who helped the Prophet )
     along with Al-Abbas. I said. 'No.' He said, 'He
     was 'Ali (Ibn Abi Talib). 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 656: 

     Narrated Aisha: 

     the mother of the believers: Allah's Apostle
     during his illness prayed at his house while sitting
     whereas some people prayed behind him
     standing. The Prophet beckoned them to sit
     down. On completion of the prayer, he said, 'The
     Imam is to be followed: bow when he bows,
     raise up your heads (stand erect) when he raises
     his head and when he says, 'Sami a-l-lahu
     liman-hamida ' (Allah heard those who sent
     praises to Him) say then 'Rabbana wa
     laka-l-hamd' (O our Lord! All the praises are for
     You), and if he prays sitting then pray sitting." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 657: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once Allah's Apostle rode a horse and fell down
     and the right side (of his body) was injured. He
     offered one of the prayers while sitting and we
     also prayed behind him sitting. When he
     completed the prayer, he said, "The Imam is to
     be followed. Pray standing if he prays standing
     and bow when he bows; rise when he rises; and
     if he says, 'Sami a-l-lahu-liman hamida, say then,
     'Rabbana wa Lakal-hamd' and pray standing if
     he prays standing and pray sitting (all of you) if
     he prays sitting." 

     Humaid said: The saying of the Prophet "Pray
     sitting, if he (Imam) prays sitting" was said in his
     former illness (during his early life) but the
     Prophet prayed sitting afterwards (in the last
     illness) and the people were praying standing
     behind him and the Prophet did not order them
     to sit. We should follow the latest actions of the
     Prophet. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 658: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     (and he was not a liar) When Allah's Apostle
     said, "Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida " none of us
     bent his back (for prostrations) till the Prophet
     prostrated and then we would prostrate after
     him. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 659: 

     Narrated Abu Ishaq: 

     as above. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 660: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Isn't he who raises his head
     before the Imam afraid that Allah may transform
     his head into that of a donkey or his figure (face)
     into that of a donkey?" 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 661: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     When the earliest emigrants came to Al-'Usba a
     place in Quba', before the arrival of the Prophet-
     Salim, the slave of Abu Hudhaifa, who knew the
     Qur'an more than the others used to lead them in
     prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 662: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Listen and obey (your chief)
     even if an Ethiopian whose head is like a raisin
     were made your chief." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 663: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If the Imam leads the
     prayer correctly then he and you will receive the
     rewards but if he makes a mistake (in the prayer)
     then you will receive the reward for the prayer
     and the sin will be his." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 664: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said to Abu-Dhar, "Listen and obey
     (your chief) even if he is an Ethiopian with a head
     like a raisin." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 665: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once I passed the night in the house of my aunt
     Maimuna. Allah's Apostle offered the 'Isha'
     prayer and then came to the house and offered
     four Rakat an slept. Later on, he woke up and
     stood for the prayer and I stood on his left side.
     He drew me to his right and prayed five Rakat
     and then two. He then slept till I heard him
     snoring (or heard his breath sounds). Afterwards
     he went out for the morning prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 666: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     One night I slept at the house of (my aunt)
     Maimuna and the Prophet was there on that
     night. He performed ablution and stood up for
     the prayer. I joined him and stood on his left side
     but he drew me to his right and prayed thirteen
     Rakat and then slept till I heard his breath
     sounds. And whenever he slept, he used to
     breathe with audible sounds. The Mu'adhdhin
     came to the Prophet and he went out and prayed
     the morning prayer) without repeating the
     ablution. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 667: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once I passed the night in the house of my aunt
     Maimuna. The Prophet stood for the night prayer
     and I joined him and stood on his left side but he
     drew me to his right by holding me by the head. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 668: 

     Narrated Mu'adh bin Jabal: 

     I used to pray the 'Isha prayer with the Prophet
     and then go to lead my people in the prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 669: 

     Narrated 'Amr: 

     Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, "Mu'adh bin Jabal used
     to pray with the Prophet and then go to lead his
     people in prayer Once he led the 'Isha' prayer
     and recited Surat "Al-Baqra." Somebody left the
     prayer and Mu'adh criticized him. The news
     reached the Prophet and he said to Mu'adh,
     'You are putting the people to trial,' and repeated
     it thrice (or said something similar) and ordered
     him to recite two medium Suras of Mufassal."
     ('Amr said that he had forgotten the names of
     those Suras). 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 670: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud: 

     A man came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! By
     Allah, I keep away from the morning prayer only
     because So and so prolongs the prayer when he
     leads us in it." The narrator said, "I never saw
     Allah's Apostle more furious in giving advice than
     he was at that time. He then said, "Some of you
     make people dislike good deeds (the prayer). So
     whoever among you leads the people in prayer
     should shorten it because among them are the
     weak, the old and the needy." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 671: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If anyone of you leads the
     people in the prayer, he should shorten it for
     amongst them are the weak, the sick and the old;
     and if anyone among your prays alone then he
     may prolong (the prayer) as much as he wishes. "


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 672: 

     Narrated Abu Mas'ud: 

     A man came and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I
     keep away from the morning prayer because
     so-and-so (Imam) prolongs it too much." Allah's
     Apostle became furious and I had never seen him
     more furious than he was on that day. The
     Prophet said, "O people! Some of you make
     others dislike the prayer, so whoever becomes
     an Imam he should shorten the prayer, as behind
     him are the weak, the old and the needy.'' 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 673: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari: 

     Once a man was driving two Nadihas (camels
     used for agricultural purposes) and night had
     fallen. He found Mu'adh praying so he made his
     camel kneel and joined Mu'adh in the prayer.
     The latter recited Surat 'AlBaqara" or Surat
     "An-Nisa", (so) the man left the prayer and went
     away. When he came to know that Mu'adh had
     criticized him, he went to the Prophet, and
     complained against Mu'adh. The Prophet said
     thrice, "O Mu'adh ! Are you putting the people
     to trial?" It would have been better if you had
     recited "Sabbih Isma Rabbika-l-a-la (87)",
     Wash-Shamsi wadu-haha (91)", or "Wal-laili
     Idha yaghsha (92)", for the old, the weak and the
     needy pray behind you." Jabir said that Mu'adh
     recited Sura Al-Baqara in the 'Isha' prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 674: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet used to pray a short prayer (in
     congregation) but used to offer it in a perfect
     manner. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 675: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abi Qatada: 

     My father said, "The Prophet said, 'When I stand
     for prayer, I intend to prolong it but on hearing
     the cries of a child, I cut it short, as I dislike to
     trouble the child's mother.' " 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 676: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     I never prayed behind any Imam a prayer lighter
     and more perfect than that behind the Prophet
     and he used to cut short the prayer whenever he
     heard the cries of a child lest he should put the
     child's mother to trial. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 677: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "When I start the prayer I
     intend to prolong it, but on hearing the cries of a
     child, I cut short the prayer because I know that
     the cries of the child will incite its mother's
     passions." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 678: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet, said, "Whenever I start the prayer I
     intend to prolong it, but on hearing the cries of a
     child, I cut short the prayer because I know that
     the cries of the child will incite its mother's
     passions." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 679: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     Mu'adh used to pray with the Prophet and then
     go and lead his people (tribe) in the prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 680: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When the Prophet, became ill in his fatal illness,
     Someone came to inform him about the prayer,
     and the Prophet told him to tell Abu Bakr to lead
     the people in the prayer. I said, "Abu Bakr is a
     soft-hearted man and if he stands for the prayer
     in your place, he would weep and would not be
     able to recite the Qur'an." The Prophet said, "Tell
     Abu Bakr to lead the prayer." I said the same as
     before. He (repeated the same order and) on the
     third or the fourth time he said, "You are the
     companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the
     prayer." So Abu Bakr led the prayer and
     meanwhile the Prophet felt better and came out
     with the help of two men; as if I see him just now
     dragging his feet on the ground. When Abu Bakr
     saw him, he tried to retreat but the Prophet
     beckoned him to carry on. Abu Bakr retreated a
     bit and the Prophet sat on his (left) side. Abu
     Bakr was repeating the Takbir (Allahu Akbar) of
     Allah's Apostle for the people to hear. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 681: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When Allah's Apostle became seriously ill, Bilal
     came to him for the prayer. He said, "Tell Abu
     Bakr to lead the people in the prayer." I said, "O
     Allah's Apostle! Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted man
     and if he stands in your place, he would not be
     able to make the people hear him. Will you order
     'Umar (to lead the prayer)?" The Prophet said,
     "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer."
     Then I said to Hafsa, "Tell him, Abu i Bakr is a
     soft-hearted man and if he stands in his place, he
     would not be able to make the people hear him.
     Would you order 'Umar to lead the prayer?' "
     Hafsa did so. The Prophet said, "Verily you are
     the companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead
     the people in the prayer." So Abu- Bakr stood
     for the prayer. In the meantime Allah's Apostle
     felt better and came out with the help of two
     persons and both of his legs were dragging on
     the ground till he entered the mosque. When Abu
     Bakr heard him coming, he tried to retreat but
     Allah's Apostle beckoned him to carry on. The
     Prophet sat on his left side. Abu Bakr was
     praying while standing and Allah's Apostle was
     leading the prayer while sitting. Abu Bakr was
     following the Prophet and the people were
     following Abu Bakr (in the prayer). 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 682: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Once Allah's Apostle prayed two Rakat (instead
     of four) and finished his prayer. Dhu-l-yadain
     asked him whether the prayer had been reduced
     or whether he had forgotten. Allah's Apostle
     asked the people whether Dhu-l-yadain was
     telling the truth. The people replied in the
     affirmative. Then Allah's Apostle stood up,
     offered the remaining two Rakat and then
     finished his prayer with Taslim and then said,
     "Allahu Akbar." He followed it with two
     prostrations like ordinary prostrations or a bit
     longer. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 683: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet prayed two Rakat of Zuhr prayer
     (instead of four) and he was told that he had
     prayed two Rakat only. Then he prayed two
     more Rakat and finished them with the Taslim
     followed by two prostrations. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 684: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     the mother of the faithful believers: Allah's
     Apostle in his last illness said, "Tell Abu Bakr to
     lead the people in the prayer." I said, "If Abu
     Bakr stood in your place, he would not be able
     to make the people hear him owing to his
     weeping. So please order 'Umar to lead the
     prayer." He said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the
     people in the prayer." I said to Hafsa, "Say to
     him, 'Abu Bakr is a softhearted man and if he
     stood in your place he would not be able to
     make the people hear him owing to his weeping.
     So order 'Umar to lead the people in the prayer.'
     " Hafsa did so but Allah's Apostle said, "Keep
     quiet. Verily you are the companions of
     (Prophet) Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the
     people in the prayer." Hafsa said to me, "I never
     got any good from you." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 685: 

     Narrated An-Nu'man bin 'Bashir: 

     The Prophet said, "Straighten your rows or Allah
     will alter your faces." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 686: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet said, "Straighten your rows, for I
     see you from behind my back.' 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 687: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once the Iqama was pronounced and Allah's
     Apostle faced us and said, "Straighten your rows
     and stand closer together, for I see you from
     behind my back.' 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 688: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Martyrs are those who die
     because of drowning, plague, an abdominal
     disease, or of being buried alive by a falling
     building." And then he added, "If the people
     knew the Reward for the Zuhr prayer in its early
     time, they would race for it. If they knew the
     reward for the 'Isha' and the Fajr prayers in
     congregation, they would join them even if they
     had to crawl. If they knew the reward for the first
     row, they would draw lots for it." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 689: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The Imam is (appointed) to
     be followed. So do not differ from him, bow
     when he bows, and say, "Rabbana-lakal hamd" if
     he says "Sami'a-l-lahu Liman hamida"; and if he
     prostrates, prostrate (after him), and if he prays
     sitting, pray sitting all together, and straighten the
     rows for the prayer, as the straightening of the
     rows is amongst those things which make your
     prayer a correct and perfect one. (See Hadith
     No. 657). 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 690: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Straighten your rows as the
     straightening of rows is essential for a perfect and
     correct prayer. " 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 691: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     I arrived at Medina and was asked whether I
     found any change since the days of Allah's
     Apostle. I said, "I have not found any change
     except that you do not stand in alignment in your
     prayers." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 692: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Straighten your rows for I see
     you from behind my back." Anas added,
     "Everyone of us used to put his shoulder with the
     shoulder of his companion and his foot with the
     foot of his companion." 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 693: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     I prayed with the Prophet one night and stood on
     his left side. Allah's Apostle caught hold of my
     head from behind and drew me to his right and
     then offered the prayer and slept. Later the
     Mu'adh-dhin came and the Prophet stood up for
     prayer without performing ablution. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 694: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     One night an orphan and I offered the prayers
     behind the Prophet in my house and my mother
     (Um Sulaim) was standing behind us (by herself
     forming a row). 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 695: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     One night I stood to the left of the Prophet in the
     prayer but he caught hold of me by the hand or
     by the shoulder (arm) till he made me stand on
     his right and beckoned with his hand (for me) to
     go from behind (him). (Al-Kashmaihani-Fateh
     al-Bari). 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 696: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to pray in his room at night.
     As the wall of the room was LOW, the people
     saw him and some of them stood up to follow
     him in the prayer. In the morning they spread the
     news. The following night the Prophet stood for
     the prayer and the people followed him. This
     went on for two or three nights. Thereupon
     Allah's Apostle did not stand for the prayer the
     following night, and did not come out. In the
     morning, the people asked him about it. He
     replied, that he way afraid that the night prayer
     might become compulsory. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 697: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet had a mat which he used to spread
     during the day and use as a curtain at night. So a
     number of people gathered at night facing it and
     prayed behind him. 


Volume 1, Book 11, Number 698: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Thabit: 

     Allah's Apostle made a small room in the month
     of Ramadan (Sa'id said, "I think that Zaid bin
     Thabit said that it was made of a mat") and he
     prayed there for a few nights, and so some of his
     companions prayed behind him. When he came
     to know about it, he kept on sitting. In the
     morning, he went out to them and said, "I have
     seen and understood what you did. You should
     pray in your houses, for the best prayer of a
     person is that which he prays in his house except
     the compulsory prayers." 


Translation of Sahih Bukhari, Book 12: 

   Characteristics of Prayer 



Volume 1, Book 12, Number 699: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik Al-Ansari: 

     Allah's Apostle rode a horse and fell down and
     the right side of his body was injured. On that
     day he prayed one of the prayers sitting and we
     also prayed behind him sitting. When the Prophet
     finished the prayer with Taslim, he said, "The
     Imam is to be followed and if he prays standing
     then pray standing, and bow when he bows, and
     raise your heads when he raises his head;
     prostrate when he prostrates; and if he says
     "Sami'a-l-lahu Liman hamida", you should say,
     "Rabbana wa-laka-l hamd.: 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 700: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle fell from a horse and got injured
     so he led the prayer sitting and we also prayed
     sitting. When he completed the prayer he said,
     "The Imam is to be followed; if he says Takbir
     then say Takbir, bow if he bows; raise your
     heads when he raises his head, when he says,
     'Sami' a-l-lahu Liman hamida say, 'Rabbana
     laka-l-hamd', and prostrate when he prostrates." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 701: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "The Imam is to be followed.
     Say the Takbir when he says it; bow if he bows;
     if he says 'Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida', say, '
     Rabbana wa-laka-l-hamd', prostrate if he
     prostrates and pray sitting altogether if he prays
     sitting." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 702: 

     Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah: 

     My father said, "Allah's Apostle used to raise
     both his hands up to the level of his shoulders
     when opening the prayer; and on saying the
     Takbir for bowing. And on raising his head from
     bowing he used to do the same and then say
     "Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida, Rabbana
     walaka-l-hamd." And he did not do that (i.e.
     raising his hands) in prostrations. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 703: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     I saw that whenever Allah's Apostle stood for
     the prayer, he used to raise both his hands up to
     the shoulders, and used to do the same on saying
     the Takbir for bowing and on raising his head
     from it and used to say, "Sami a-l-lahu Liman
     hamida". But he did not do that (i.e. raising his
     hands) in prostrations. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 704: 

     Narrated Abu Qilaba: 

     I saw Malik bin Huwairith saying Takbir and
     raising both his hands (on starting the prayers and
     raising his hands on bowing and also on raising
     his head after bowing. Malik bin Huwairith said,
     "Allah's Apostle did the same." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 705: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle opening the prayer with the
     Takbir and raising his hands to the level of his
     shoulders at the time of saying the Takbir, and on
     saying the Takbir for bowing he did the same;
     and when he said, "Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida
     ", he did the same and then said, "Rabbana wa
     laka-l-hamd." But he did not do the same on
     prostrating and on lifting the head from it." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 706: 

     Narrated Nafi': 

     Whenever Ibn 'Umar started the prayer with
     Takbir, he used to raise his hands: whenever he
     bowed, he used to raise his hands (before
     bowing) and also used to raise his hands on
     saying, "Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida", and he
     used to do the same on rising from the second
     Rak'a (for the 3rd Rak'a). Ibn 'Umar said: "The
     Prophet used to do the same." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 707: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd: 

     The people were ordered to place the right hand
     on the left forearm in the prayer. Abu Hazim
     said, "I knew that the order was from the
     Prophet ." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 708: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "You see me facing the
     Qibla; but, by Allah, nothing is hidden from me
     regarding your bowing and submissiveness and I
     see you from behind my back." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 709: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Perform the bowing and the
     prostrations properly. By Allah, I see you from
     behind me (or from behind my back) when you
     bow or prostrate." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 710: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet, Abu Bakr and 'Umar used to start
     the prayer with "Al-hamdu lil-lahi Rabbil-'ala-min
     (All praises are for Allah the Lord of the
     Worlds)." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 711: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle used to keep silent between the
     Takbir and the recitation of Qur'an and that
     interval of silence used to be a short one. I said
     to the Prophet "May my parents be sacrificed for
     you! What do you say in the pause between
     Takbir and recitation?" The Prophet said, "I say,
     'Allahumma, ba'id baini wa baina khatayaya
     kama ba'adta baina-l-mashriqi wa-l-maghrib.
     Allahumma, naqqim min khatayaya kama
     yunaqqa-ththawbu-l-abyadu mina-ddanas.
     Allahumma, ighsil khatayaya bil-ma'i wa-th-thalji
     wal-barad (O Allah! Set me apart from my sins
     (faults) as the East and West are set apart from
     each other and clean me from sins as a white
     garment is cleaned of dirt (after thorough
     washing). O Allah! Wash off my sins with water,
     snow and hail.)" 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 712: 

     Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr: 

     The Prophet once offered the eclipse prayer. He
     stood for a long time and then did a prolonged
     bowing. He stood up straight again and kept on
     standing for a long time, then bowed a long
     bowing and then stood up straight and then
     prostrated a prolonged prostration and then lifted
     his head and prostrated a prolonged prostration.
     And then he stood up for a long time and then
     did a prolonged bowing and then stood up
     straight again and kept on standing for a long
     time. Then he bowed a long bowing and then
     stood up straight and then prostrated a
     prolonged prostration and then lifted his head
     and went for a prolonged prostration. On
     completion o the prayer, he said, "Paradise
     became s near to me that if I had dared, I would
     have plucked one of its bunches for you and Hell
     became so near to me that said, 'O my Lord will
     I be among those people?' Then suddenly I saw
     a woman and a cat was lacerating her with it
     claws. On inquiring, it was said that the woman
     had imprisoned the cat till it died of starvation
     and she neither fed it no freed it so that it could
     feed itself." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 713: 

     Narrated Abu Ma'mar: 

     We asked Khabbab whether Allah's Apostle
     used to recite (the Qur'an) in the Zuhr and the
     'Asr prayers. He replied in the affirmative. We
     said, "How did you come to know about it?" He
     said, "By the movement of his beard." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 714: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     (And Al-Bara was not a liar) Whenever we
     offered prayer with the Prophet and he raised his
     head from the bowing, we used to remain
     standing till we saw him prostrating . 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 715: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas: 

     Once solar eclipse occurred during the lifetime of
     Allah's Apostle. He offered the eclipse prayer.
     His companions asked, "O Allah's Apostle! We
     saw you trying to take something while standing
     at your place and then we saw you retreating."
     The Prophet said, "I was shown Paradise and
     wanted to have a bunch of fruit from it. Had I
     taken it, you would have eaten from it as long as
     the world remains." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 716: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet led us in prayer and then went up to
     the pulpit and beckoned with both hands
     towards the Qibla of the mosque and then said,
     "When I started leading you in prayer, I saw the
     display of Paradise and Hell on the wall of the
     mosque (facing the Qibla). I never saw good and
     bad as I have seen today." He repeated the last
     statement thrice. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 717: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "What is wrong with those
     people who look towards the sky during the
     prayer?" His talk grew stern while delivering this
     speech and he said, "They should stop (looking
     towards the sky during the prayer); otherwise
     their eye-sight would be taken away." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 718: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     I asked Allah's Apostle about looking hither and
     thither in prayer. He replied, "It is a way of
     stealing by which Satan takes away (a portion)
     from the prayer of a person." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 719: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Once the Prophet prayed on a Khamisa with
     marks on it and said, "The marks on it diverted
     my attention, take this Khamisa to Abu Jahm and
     bring an Inbijaniya (from him.)" 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 720: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet saw expectoration in the direction
     of the Qibla of the mosque while he was leading
     the prayer, and scratched it off. After finishing the
     prayer, he said, "Whenever any of you is in
     prayer he should know that Allah is in front of
     him. So none should spit in front of him in the
     prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 721: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     While the Muslims were offering the Fajr prayer,
     Al lah's Apostle suddenly appeared before them
     by living the curtain of the dwelling place of
     'Aisha, looked towards the Muslims who were
     standing in rows. He smiled with pleasure. Abu
     Bakr started retreating to join the row on the
     assumption that the Prophet wanted to come out
     for the prayer. The Muslims intended to leave the
     prayer (and were on the verge of being put to
     trial), but the Prophet beckoned them to
     complete their prayer and then he let the curtain
     fall. He died in the last hours of that day. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 722: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Samura: 

     The People of Kufa complained against Sa'd to
     'Umar and the latter dismissed him and appointed
     'Ammar as their chief . They lodged many
     complaints against Sa'd and even they alleged
     that he did not pray properly. 'Umar sent for him
     and said, "O Aba Ishaq! These people claim that
     you do not pray properly." Abu Ishaq said, "By
     Allah, I used to pray with them a prayer similar
     to that of Allah's Apostle and I never reduced
     anything of it. I used to prolong the first two
     Rakat of 'Isha prayer and shorten the last two
     Rakat." 'Umar said, "O Aba Ishaq, this was what
     I thought about you." And then he sent one or
     more persons with him to Kufa so as to ask the
     people about him. So they went there and did
     not leave any mosque without asking about him.
     All the people praised him till they came to the
     mosque of the tribe of Bani 'Abs; one of the men
     called Usama bin Qatada with a surname of Aba
     Sa'da stood up and said, "As you have put us
     under an oath; I am bound to tell you that Sa'd
     never went himself with the army and never
     distributed (the war booty) equally and never did
     justice in legal verdicts." (On hearing it) Sa'd
     said, "I pray to Allah for three things: O Allah! If
     this slave of yours is a liar and got up for showing
     off, give him a long life, increase his poverty and
     put him to trials." (And so it happened). Later on
     when that person was asked how he was, he
     used to reply that he was an old man in trial as
     the result of Sa'd's curse. 'Abdul Malik, the sub
     narrator, said that he had seen him afterwards
     and his eyebrows were over-hanging his eyes
     owing to old age and he used to tease and
     assault the small girls in the way. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 723: 

     Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Whoever does not recite
     Al-Fatiha in his prayer, his prayer is invalid." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 724: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle entered the mosque and a person
     followed him. The man prayed and went to the
     Prophet and greeted him. The Prophet returned
     the greeting and said to him, "Go back and pray,
     for you have not prayed." The man went back
     prayed in the same way as before, returned and
     greeted the Prophet who said, "Go back and
     pray, for you have not prayed." This happened
     thrice. The man said, "By Him Who sent you
     with the Truth, I cannot offer the prayer in a
     better way than this. Please, teach me how to
     pray." The Prophet said, "When you stand for
     Prayer say Takbir and then recite from the Holy
     Qur'an (of what you know by heart) and then
     bow till you feel at ease. Then raise your head
     and stand up straight, then prostrate till you feel
     at ease during your prostration, then sit with
     calmness till you feel at ease (do not hurry) and
     do the same in all your prayers 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 725: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Samura: 

     Sa'd said, "I used to pray with them a prayer
     similar to that of Allah's Apostle (the prayer of
     Zuhr and 'Asr) reducing nothing from them. I
     used to prolong the first two Rakat and shorten
     the last two Rak'at." 'Umar said to Sa'd "This
     was what we thought about you." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 726: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada: 

     My father said, "The Prophet in Zuhr prayers
     used to recite Al-Fatiha along with two other
     Suras in the first two Rakat: a long one in the first
     Rak'a and a shorter (Sura) in the second, and at
     times the verses were audible. In the 'Asr prayer
     the Prophet used to recite Al-Fatiha and two
     more Suras in the first two Rakat and used to
     prolong the first Rak'a. And he used to prolong
     the first Rak'a of the Fajr prayer and shorten the
     second. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 727: 

     Narrated Abu Ma'mar: 

     I asked Khabbab whether the Prophet used to
     recite the Qur'an in the Zuhr and the 'Asr
     prayers. He replied in the affirmative. We said,
     "How did you come to know that?" He said,
     "From the movement of his beard." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 728: 

     Narrated Abu Ma'mar: 

     I asked Khabbab bin Al-Art whether the
     Prophet used to recite the Qur'an in the Zuhr and
     the 'Asr prayers. He replied in the affirmative. I
     said, "How did you come to know that?" He
     replied, "From the movement of his beard." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 729: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada: 

     My father said, "The Prophet used to recite
     Al-Fatiha along with another Sura in the first two
     Rakat of the Zuhr and the 'Asr prayers and at
     times a t verse or so was audible to us." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 730: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     (My mother) Umu-l-Fadl heard me reciting "Wal
     Mursalati 'Urfan" (77) and said, "O my son! By
     Allah, your recitation made me remember that it
     was the last Sura I heard from Allah's Apostle.
     He recited it in the Maghrib prayer. " 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 731: 

     Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam: 

     Zaid bin Thabit said to me, "Why do you recite
     very short S&ras in the Maghrib prayer while I
     heard the Prophet reciting the longer of the two
     long Suras?" 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 732: 

     Narrated Jubair bin Mut'im: 

     My father said, "I heard Allah's Apostle reciting
     "At-Tur" (52) in the Maghrib prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 733: 

     Narrated Abu Rafi: 

     I offered the 'Isha' prayer behind Abu Huraira
     and he recited, "Idha-s-Sama'u-n-Shaqqat" (84)
     and prostrated. On my inquiring, he said, "I
     prostrated behind Abu-l-Qasim (the Prophet)
     (when he recited that Sura) and I will go on
     doing it till I meet him." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 734: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The Prophet was on a journey and recited in one
     of the first two Rakat of the 'Isha' prayer
     "Wat-tini waz-zaituni." (95) 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 735: 

     Narrated Abu Rafi': 

     Once I prayed the 'Isha' prayer with Abu Huraira
     and he recited, "Idha-s-Sama' u-nShaqqat" (84)
     and prostrated. I said, "What is that?" He said, "I
     prostrated behind Abu-l-Qasim, (the Prophet)
     (when he recited that Sura) and I will go on
     doing it till I meet him." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 736: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     I heard the Prophet reciting wat-tini wazzaituni"
     (95) in the 'Isha' prayer, and I never heard a
     sweeter voice or a better way of recitation than
     that of the Prophet. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 737: 

     Narrated Jabir bin Samura: 

     'Umar said to Sa'd, "The people complained
     against you in everything, even in prayer." Sa'd
     replied, "Really I used to prolong the first two
     Rakat and shorten the last two and I will never
     shorten the prayer in which I follow Allah's
     Apostle." 'Umar said, "You are telling the truth
     and that is what I think a tout you." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 738: 

     Narrated Saiyar bin Salama: 

     My father and I went to Abu Barza-al-Aslami to
     ask him about the stated times for the prayers.
     He replied, "The Prophet used to offer the Zuhr
     prayer when the sun just declined from its highest
     position at noon; the 'Asr at a time when if a man
     went to the farthest place in Medina (after
     praying) he would find the sun still hot (bright).
     (The sub narrator said: I have forgotten what
     Abu Barza said about the Maghrib prayer). The
     Prophet never found any harm in delaying the
     'Isha' prayer to the first third of the night and he
     never liked to sleep before it and to talk after it.
     He used to offer the morning prayer at a time
     when after finishing it one could recognize the
     person sitting beside him and used to recite
     between 60 to 100 verses in one or both the
     Rakat." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 739: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Qur'an is recited in every prayer and in those
     prayers in which Allah's Apostle recited aloud for
     us, we recite aloud in the same prayers for you;
     and the prayers in which the Prophet recited
     quietly, we recite quietly. If you recite "Al-Fatiha"
     only it is sufficient but if you recite something else
     in addition, it is better. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 740: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet set out with the intention of going to
     Suq 'Ukaz (market of 'Ukaz) along with some of
     his companions. At the same time, a barrier was
     put between the devils and the news of heaven.
     Fire commenced to be thrown at them. The
     Devils went to their people, who asked them,
     "What is wrong with you?" They said, "A barrier
     has been placed between us and the news of
     heaven. And fire has been thrown at us." They
     said, "The thing which has put a barrier between
     you and the news of heaven must be something
     which has happened recently. Go eastward and
     westward and see what has put a barrier
     between you and the news of heaven." Those
     who went towards Tuhama came across the
     Prophet at a place called Nakhla and it was on
     the way to Suq 'Ukaz and the Prophet was
     offering the Fajr prayer with his companions.
     When they heard the Qur'an they listened to it
     and said, "By Allah, this is the thing which has put
     a barrier between us and the news of heaven."
     They went to their people and said, "O our
     people; verily we have heard a wonderful recital
     (Qur'an) which shows the true path; we believed
     in it and would not ascribe partners to our Lord."
     Allah revealed the following verses to his Prophet
     (Sura 'Jinn') (72): "Say: It has been revealed to
     me." And what was revealed to him was the
     conversation of the Jinns. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 741: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet recited aloud in the prayers in which
     he was ordered to do so and quietly in the
     prayers in which he was ordered to do so. "And
     your Lord is not forgetful." "Verily there was a
     good example for you in the ways of the
     Prophet." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 742: 

     Narrated Abu Wa'il: 

     A man came to Ibn Mas'ud and said, "I recited
     the Mufassal (Suras) at night in one Rak'a." Ibn
     Mas'ud said, "This recitation is (too quick) like
     the recitation of poetry. I know the identical
     Suras which the Prophet used to recite in pairs."
     Ibn Mas'ud then mentioned 20 Mufassal Suras
     including two Suras from the family of (i.e. those
     verses which begin with) AL, HA, MIM (which
     the Prophet used to recite) in each Rak'a. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 743: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada: 

     My father said, "The Prophet uses to recite
     Al-Fatiha followed by another Sura in the first
     two Rakat of the prayer and used to recite only
     Al-Fatiha in the last two Rakat of the Zuhr
     prayer. Sometimes a verse or so was audible and
     he used to prolong the first Rak'a more than the
     second and used to do the same in the 'Asr and
     Fajr prayers." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 744: 

     Narrated Abu Ma'mar: 

     We said to Khabbab "Did Allah's Apostle used
     to recite in Zuhr and 'Asr prayers?" He replied in
     the affirmative. We said, "How did you come to
     know about it?" He said, "By the movement of
     his beard." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 745: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada: 

     My father said, "The Prophet used to recite
     Al-Fatiha along with another Sura in the first two
     Rakat of the Zuhr and 'Asr prayers. A verse or
     so was audible at times and he used to prolong
     the first Rak'a." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 746: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada: 

     My father said, "The Prophet used to prolong the
     first Rak'a of the Zuhr prayer and shorten the
     second one and used to do the same in the Fajr
     prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 747: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The Prophet said, "Say Amin" when the Imam
     says it and if the Amin of any one of you
     coincides with that of the angels then all his past
     sins will be forgiven." Ibn Shihab said, "Allah's
     Apostle used to Say "Amin." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 748: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "If any one of you says,
     "Amin" and the angels in the heavens say "Amin"
     and the former coincides with the latter, all his
     past sins will be forgiven." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 749: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "Say Amen' when the Imam
     says "Ghair-il-maghdubi 'alaihim wala-ddal-lin;
     not the path of those who earn Your Anger (such
     as Jews) nor of those who go astray (such as
     Christians); all the past sins of the person whose
     saying (of Amin) coincides with that of the
     angels, will be forgiven. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 750: 

     Narrated Abu Bakra: 

     I reached the Prophet in the mosque while he
     was bowing in prayer and I too bowed before
     joining the row mentioned it to the Prophet and
     he said to me, "May Allah increase your love for
     the good. But do not repeat it again (bowing in
     that way)." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 751: 

     Narrated Imran bin Husain: 

     I offered the prayer with 'Ali in Basra and he
     made us remember the prayer which we used to
     pray with Allah's Apostle. 'Ali said Takbir on
     each rising and bowing. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 752: 

     Narrated Abu Salama: 

     When Abu Huraira led us in prayer he used to
     say Takbir on each bowing and rising. On the
     completion of the prayer he used to say, "My
     prayer is more similar to the prayer of Allah's
     Apostle than that of anyone of you." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 753: 

     Narrated Mutarrif bin 'Abdullah: 

     'Imran bin Husain and I offered the prayer behind
     Ali bin Abi Talib. When 'Ali prostrated, he said
     the Takbir, when he raised his head, he said the
     Takbir and when he got up for the third Rak'a he
     said the Takbir. On completion of the prayer
     Imran took my hand and said, "This (i.e. 'Ali)
     made me remember the prayer of Muhammad"
     Or he said, "He led us in a prayer like that of
     Muhammad." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 754: 

     Narrated 'Ikrima: 

     I saw a person praying at Muqam-lbrahim (the
     place of Abraham by the Ka'ba) and he was
     saying Takbir on every bowing, rising, standing
     and sitting. I asked Ibn 'Abbas (about this
     prayer). He admonished me saying: "Isn't that the
     prayer of the Prophet?" 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 755: 

     Narrated 'Ikrima: 

     I prayed behind a Sheikh at Mecca and he said
     twenty two Takbirs (during the prayer). I told
     Ibn 'Abbas that he (i.e. that Sheikh) was foolish.
     Ibn 'Abbas admonished me and said, "This is the
     tradition of Abu-l-Qasim." And narrated Abu
     Huraira: Whenever Allah's Apostle stood for the
     prayer, he said Takbir on starting the prayer and
     then on bowing. On rising from bowing he said,
     "Sami' a-l-lahu liman hamida," and then while
     standing straight he used to say, "Rabbana laka-l
     hamd" (Al-Laith said, "(The Prophet said),
     'Walaka-l-hamd'." He used to say Takbir on
     prostrating and on raising his head from
     prostration; again he would Say Takbir on
     prostrating and raising his head. He would then
     do the same in the whole of the prayer till it was
     completed. On rising from the second Rak'a
     (after sitting for At-Tahiyyat), he used to say
     Takbir. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 756: 

     Narrated Mus'ab bin Sa'd: 

     I offered prayer beside my father and
     approximated both my hands and placed them in
     between the knees. My father told me not to do
     so and said, "We used to do the same but we
     were forbidden (by the Prophet) to do it and
     were ordered to place the hands on the knees." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 757: 

     Narrated Zaid binWahb: 

     Hudhaifa saw a person who was not performing
     the bowing and prostrations perfectly. He said to
     him, "You have not prayed and if you should die
     you would die on a religion other than that of
     Muhammad." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 758: 

     Narrated Al-Bara: 

     The bowing, the prostration the sitting in between
     the two prostrations and the standing after the
     bowing of the Prophet but not Qiyam (standing in
     the prayer) and Qu'ud (sitting in the prayer) used
     to be approximately equal (in duration). 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 759: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Once the Prophet entered the mosque, a man
     came in, offered the prayer and greeted the
     Prophet. The Prophet returned his greeting and
     said to him, "Go back and pray again for you
     have not prayed." The man offered the prayer
     again, came back and greeted the Prophet. He
     said to him thrice, "Go back and pray again for
     you have not prayed." The man said, "By Him
     Who has sent you with the truth! I do not know a
     better way of praying. Kindly teach Me how to
     pray." He said, "When you stand for the prayer,
     say Takbir and then recite from the Qur'an what
     you know and then bow with calmness till you
     feel at ease, then rise from bowing till you stand
     straight. Afterwards prostrate calmly till you feel
     at ease and then raise (your head) and sit with
     Calmness till you feel at ease and then prostrate
     with calmness till you feel at ease in prostration
     and do the same in the whole of your prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 760: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to say in his bowing and
     prostrations, "Subhanaka-Allahumma Rabbana
     wa-bihamdika Allahumma-ighfirli.' (I honor Allah
     from all what (unsuitable things) is ascribed to
     Him. O Allah Our Lord! And all the praises are
     for You. O Allah! Forgive me)." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 761: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     When the Prophet said, "Sami' a-l-lahu Liman
     hamida," (Allah heard those who sent praises to
     Him), he would say, "Rabbana wa-laka-l-hamd."
     On bowing and raising his head from it the
     Prophet used to say Takbir. He also used to say
     Takbir on rising after the two prostrations. (See
     Hadith No. 656). 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 762: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Allah's Apostle said, "When the Imam says,
     "Sami' a-l-lahu Liman hamida," you should say,
     "Allahumma Rabbana laka-l-hamd." And if the
     saying of any one of you coincides with that of
     the angels, all his past sins will be forgiven." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 763: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Qunut used to be recited in the Maghrib and
     the Fajr prayers. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 764: 

     Narrated Rifa'a bin Rafi AzZuraqi: 

     One day we were praying behind the Prophet.
     When he raised his head from bowing, he said,
     "Sami'a-l-lahu Liman hamida." A man behind him
     said, "Rabbana walaka-l hamd hamdan Kathiran
     taiyiban mubarakan fihi" (O our Lord! All the
     praises are for You, many good and blessed
     praises). When the Prophet completed the
     prayer, he asked, "Who has said these words?"
     The man replied, "I." The Prophet said, "I saw
     over thirty angels competing to write it first."
     Prophet rose (from bowing) and stood straight till
     all the vertebrae of his spinal column came to a
     natural position. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 765: 

     Narrated Thabit: 

     Anas used to demonstrate to us the prayer of the
     Prophet and while demonstrating, he used to
     raise his head from bowing and stand so long that
     we would say that he had forgotten (the
     prostration). 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 766: 

     Narrated Al-Bara': 

     The bowing, the prostrations, the period of
     standing after bowing and the interval between
     the two prostrations of the Prophet used to be
     equal in duration . 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 767: 

     Narrated Aiyub: 

     Abu Qilaba said, "Malik bin Huwairith used to
     demonstrate to us the prayer of the Prophet at
     times other than that of the compulsory prayers.
     So (once) he stood up for prayer and performed
     a perfect Qiyam (standing and reciting from the
     Holy Qur'an) and then bowed and performed
     bowing perfectly; then he raised his head and
     stood straight for a while." Abu Qilaba added,
     "Malik bin Huwairith in that demonstration
     prayed like this Sheikh of ours, Abu Yazid."
     Abu, Yazid used to sit (for a while) on raising his
     head from the second prostration before getting
     up. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 768: 

     Narrated Abu Bakr bin 'Abdur Rahman Ibn
     Harith bin Hisham and Abu Salama bin 'Abdur
     Rahman: 

     Abu Huraira used to say Takbir in all the
     prayers, compulsory and optional -- in the month
     of Ramadan or other months. He used to say
     Takbir on standing for prayer and on bowing;
     then he would say, "Salmi'a-l-lahu Liman
     hamida," and before prostrating he would say
     "Rabbana walaka-l-hamd." Then he would say
     Takbir on prostrating and on raising his head
     from the prostration, then another Takbir on
     prostrating (for the second time), and on raising
     his head from the prostration. He also would say
     the Takbir on standing from the second Rak'a.
     He used to do the same in every Rak'a till he
     completed the prayer. On completion of the
     prayer, he would say, "By Him in Whose Hands
     my soul is! No doubt my prayer is closer to that
     of Allah's Apostle than yours, and this was His
     prayer till he left this world." And Abu Huraira
     said, "When Allah's Apostle raised his head from
     (bowing) he used to say "Sami' a-l-lahu Liman
     hamida, Rabbana walakal-hamd." He Would
     invoke Allah for some people by naming them:
     "O Allah! Save Al-Walid bin Al-Walid and
     Salama bin Hisham and 'Aiyash bin Abi Rabi'a
     and the weak and the helpless people among the
     faithful believers O Allah! Be hard on the tribe of
     Mudar and let them suffer from famine years like
     that of the time of Joseph." In those days the
     Eastern section of the tribe of Mudar was against
     the Prophet. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 769: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Allah's Apostle fell from a horse and the right
     side of his body was injured. We went to enquire
     about his health meanwhile it was time for the
     prayer and he led the prayer sitting and we also
     prayed while sitting. On completion of the prayer
     he said, "The Imam is to be followed; say Takbir
     when he says it; bow when he bows; rise when
     he rises and when he says "Sami'a-l-lahu Liman
     hamida," say, "Rabbana walaka-lhamd", and
     prostrate if he prostrates." Sufyan narrated the
     same from Ma'mar. Ibn Juraij said that his (the
     Prophet's) right leg had been injured. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 770: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     The people said, "O Allah's Apostle! Shall we
     see our Lord on the Day of Resurrection?" He
     replied, "Do you have any doubt in seeing the full
     moon on a clear (not cloudy) night?" They
     replied, "No, O Allah's Apostle!" He said, "Do
     you have any doubt in seeing the sun when there
     are no clouds?" They replied in the negative. He
     said, "You will see Allah (your Lord) in the same
     way. On the Day of Resurrection, people will be
     gathered and He will order the people to follow
     what they used to worship. So some of them will
     follow the sun, some will follow the moon, and
     some will follow other deities; and only this
     nation (Muslims) will be left with its hypocrites.
     Allah will come to them and say, 'I am Your
     Lord.' They will say, 'We shall stay in this place
     till our Lord comes to us and when our Lord will
     come, we will recognize Him. Then Allah will
     come to them again and say, 'I am your Lord.'
     They will say, 'You are our Lord.' Allah will call
     them, and As-Sirat (a bridge) will be laid across
     Hell and I (Muhammad) shall be the first amongst
     the Apostles to cross it with my followers.
     Nobody except the Apostles will then be able to
     speak and they will be saying then, 'O Allah!
     Save us. O Allah Save us.' 

     There will be hooks like the thorns of Sa'dan in
     Hell. Have you seen the thorns of Sa'dan?" The
     people said, "Yes." He said, "These hooks will
     be like the thorns of Sa'dan but nobody except
     Allah knows their greatness in size and these will
     entangle the people according to their deeds;
     some of them will fall and stay in Hell forever;
     others will receive punishment (torn into small
     pieces) and will get out of Hell, till when Allah
     intends mercy on whomever He likes amongst
     the people of Hell, He will order the angels to
     take out of Hell those who worshipped none but
     Him alone. The angels will take them out by
     recognizing them from the traces of prostrations,
     for Allah has forbidden the (Hell) fire to eat away
     those traces. So they will come out of the Fire, it
     will eat away from the whole of the human body
     except the marks of the prostrations. At that time
     they will come out of the Fire as mere skeletons.
     The Water of Life will be poured on them and as
     a result they will grow like the seeds growing on
     the bank of flowing water. Then when Allah had
     finished from the Judgments amongst his
     creations, one man will be left between Hell and
     Paradise and he will be the last man from the
     people of Hell to enter paradise. He will be
     facing Hell, and will say, 'O Allah! Turn my face
     from the fire as its wind has dried me and its
     steam has burnt me.' Allah will ask him, "Will you
     ask for anything more in case this favor is granted
     to you?' He will say, "No by Your (Honor)
     Power!" And he will give to his Lord (Allah)
     what he will of the pledges and the covenants.
     Allah will then turn his face from the Fire. When
     he will face Paradise and will see its charm, he
     will remain quiet as long as Allah will. He then
     will say, 'O my Lord! Let me go to the gate of
     Paradise.' Allah will ask him, 'Didn't you give
     pledges and make covenants (to the effect) that
     you would not ask for anything more than what
     you requested at first?' He will say, 'O my Lord!
     Do not make me the most wretched, amongst
     Your creatures.' Allah will say, 'If this request is
     granted, will you then ask for anything else?' He
     will say, 'No! By Your Power! I shall not ask for
     anything else.' Then he will give to his Lord what
     He will of the pledges and the covenants. Allah
     will then let him go to the gate of Paradise. On
     reaching then and seeing its life, charm, and
     pleasure, he will remain quiet as long as Allah
     wills and then will say, 'O my Lord ! Let me
     enter Paradise.' Allah will say, May Allah be
     merciful unto you, O son of Adam! How
     treacherous you are! Haven't you made
     covenants and given pledges that you will not ask
     for anything more that what you have been
     given?' He will say, 'O my Lord! Do not make
     me the most wretched amongst Your creatures.'
     So Allah will laugh and allow him to enter
     Paradise and will ask him to request as much as
     he likes. He will do so till all his desires have
     been fulfilled . Then Allah will say, 'Request more
     of such and such things.' Allah will remind him
     and when all his desires and wishes; have been
     fulfilled, Allah will say "All this is granted to you
     and a similar amount besides." Abu Said
     Al-Khudri, said to Abu Huraira, 'Allah's Apostle
     said, "Allah said, 'That is for you and ten times
     more like it.' "Abu Huraira said, "I do not
     remember from Allah's Apostle except (his
     saying), 'All this is granted to you and a similar
     amount besides." Abu Sahd said, "I heard him
     saying, 'That is for you and ten times more the
     like of it." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 771: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Malik bin Buhaina: 

     Whenever the Prophet used to offer prayer he
     used to keep arms away (from the body) so that
     the whiteness of his armpits was visible. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 772: 

     Narrated Abu Wail: 

     Hudhaifa said, "I saw a person not performing his
     bowing and prostrations perfectly. When he
     completed the prayer, I told him that he had not
     prayed." I think that Hudhaifa added (i.e. said to
     the man), "Had you died, you would have died
     on a tradition other than that of the Prophet
     Muhammad." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 773: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet was ordered (by Allah) to prostrate
     on seven parts and not to tuck up the clothes or
     hair (while praying). Those parts are: the
     forehead (along with the tip of nose), both hands,
     both knees, and (toes of) both feet. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 774: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "We have been ordered to
     prostrates on seven bones and not to tuck up the
     clothes or hair." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 775: 

     Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib: 

     (and he was not a liar) We used to pray behind
     the Prophet and when he said, "Sami' a-l-lahu
     Liman hamida", none of us would bend his back
     (to go for prostration) till the Prophet had placed
     his, forehead on the ground. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 776: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "I have been ordered to
     prostrate on seven bones i.e. on the forehead
     along with the tip of the nose and the Prophet
     pointed towards his nose, both hands, both
     knees and the toes of both feet and not to gather
     the clothes or the hair." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 777: 

     Narrated Abu Salama: 

     Once I went to Abu- Sa'id Al-Khudri and asked
     him, "Won't you come with us to the date-palm
     trees to have a talk?" So Abu Said went out and
     I asked him, "Tell me what you heard from the
     Prophet about the Night of Qadr." Abu Said
     replied, "Once Allah's Apostle performed I'tikaf
     (seclusion) on the first ten days of the month of
     Ramadan and we did the same with him. Gabriel
     came to him and said, 'The night you are looking
     for is ahead of you.' So the Prophet performed
     the I'tikaf in the middle (second) ten days of the
     month of Ramadan and we too performed I'tikaf
     with him. Gabriel came to him and said, 'The
     night which you are looking for is ahead of you.'
     In the morning of the 20th of Ramadan the
     Prophet delivered a sermon saying, 'Whoever
     has performed I'tikaf with me should continue it.
     I have been shown the Night of "Qadr", but have
     forgotten its date, but it is in the odd nights of the
     last ten nights. I saw in my dream that I was
     prostrating in mud and water.' In those days the
     roof of the mosque was made of branches of
     date-palm trees. At that time the sky was clear
     and no cloud was visible, but suddenly a cloud
     came and it rained. The Prophet led us in the
     prayer and I saw the traces of mud on the
     forehead and on the nose of Allah's Apostle. So
     it was the confirmation of that dream." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 778: 

     Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd: 

     The people used to pray with the Prophet tying
     their Izars around their necks because of their
     small sizes and the women were directed that
     they should not raise their heads from the
     prostrations till the men had sat straight. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 779: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet was ordered to prostrate on seven
     bony parts and not to tuck up his clothes or hair. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 780: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     The Prophet said, "I have been ordered to
     prostrate on seven (bones) and not to tuck up
     the hair or garment." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 781: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     The Prophet used to say frequently in his bowing
     and prostrations "Subhanaka-Allahumma
     Rabbana Wabihamdika, Allahumma Ighfir-li" (I
     honor Allah from all what (unsuitable things) is
     ascribed to Him, O Allah! Our Lord! All praises
     are for You. O Allah! Forgive me). In this way
     he was acting on what was explained to him in
     the Holy Qur'an. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 782: 

     Narrated Abu Qilaba: 

     Once Malik bin Huwairith said to his friends,
     "Shall I show you how Allah's Apostle used to
     offer his prayers?" And it was not the time for
     any of the compulsory congregational prayers.
     So he stood up (for the prayer) bowed and said
     the Takbir, then he raised his head and remained
     standing for a while and then prostrated and
     raised his head for a while (sat up for a while).
     He prayed like our Sheikh 'Amr Ibn Salama.
     (Aiyub said, "The latter used to do a thing which
     I did not see the people doing i.e. he used to sit
     between the third and the fourth Rak'a). IMalik
     bin Huwairith said, "We came to the Prophet
     (after embracing Islam) and stayed with him. He
     said to us, 'When you go back to your families,
     pray such and such a prayer at such and such a
     time, pray such and such a prayer at such and
     such a time, and when there is the time for the
     prayer then only of you should pronounce the
     Adhan for the prayer and the oldest of you
     should lead the prayer." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 783: 

     Narrated Al-Bara': 

     The time taken by the Prophet in prostrations,
     bowing, and the sitting interval between the two
     prostrations was about the same. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 784: 

     Narrated Thabit: 

     Anas said, "I will leave no stone unturned in
     making you offer the prayer as I have seen the
     Prophet making us offer it." Anas used to do a
     thing which I have not seen you doing. He used
     to stand after the bowing for such a long time that
     one would think that he had forgotten (the
     prostrations) and he used to sit in-between the
     prostrations so long that one would think that he
     had forgotten the second prostration. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 785: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     The Prophet said, "Be straight in the prostrations
     and none of you should put his forearms on the
     ground (in the prostration) like a dog." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 786: 

     Narrated Malik bin Huwairith Al-Laithi: 

     I saw the Prophet praying and in the odd Rakat,
     he used to sit for a moment before getting up. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 787: 

     Narrated Aiyub: 

     Abu Qilaba said, "Malik bin Huwairith came to
     us and led us in the prayer in this mosque of ours
     and said, 'I lead you in prayer but I do not want
     to offer the prayer but just to show you how
     Allah's Apostle performed his prayers." I asked
     Abu Qilaba, "How was the prayer of Malik bin
     Huwairith?" He replied, "Like the prayer of this
     Sheikh of ours-- i.e. 'Amr bin Salima." That
     Sheikh used to pronounce the Takbir perfectly
     and when he raised his head from the second
     prostration he would sit for a while and then
     support himself on the ground and get up. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 788: 

     Narrated Said bin Al-Harith: 

     Abu Said led us in the prayer and said the Takbir
     aloud on arising from the prostration, and on
     prostrating, on rising again, and on getting up
     from the second Rak'a. Abu Said said, "I saw
     the Prophet doing the same." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 789: 

     Narrated Mutarrif: 

     'Imran and I prayed behind 'Ali bin Abi Talib and
     he said Takbir on prostrating, on rising and on
     getting up after the two Rakat (i.e. after the
     second Rak'a). When the prayer was finished,
     'Imran took me by the hand and said, "He ('Ali)
     has prayed the prayer of Muhammad" (or said,
     "He made us remember the prayer of
     Muhammad)." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 790: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abdullah: 

     I saw 'Abdullah bin 'Umar crossing his legs while
     sitting in the prayer and I, a mere youngster in
     those days, did the same. Ibn 'Umar forbade me
     to do so, and said, "The proper way is to keep
     the right foot propped up and bend the left in the
     prayer." I said questioningly, "But you are doing
     so (crossing the legs)." He said, "My feet cannot
     bear my weight." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 791: 

     Narrated Muhammad bin 'Amr bin 'Ata': 

     I was sitting with some of the companions of
     Allah's Apostle and we were discussing about
     the way of praying of the Prophet. Abu Humaid
     As-Saidi said, "I remember the prayer of Allah's
     Apostle better than any one of you. I saw him
     raising both his hands up to the level of the
     shoulders on saying the Takbir; and on bowing
     he placed his hands on both knees and bent his
     back straight, then he stood up straight from
     bowing till all the vertebrate took their normal
     positions. In prostrations, he placed both his
     hands on the ground with the forearms away
     from the ground and away from his body, and his
     toes were facing the Qibla. On sitting In the
     second Rak'a he sat on his left foot and propped
     up the right one; and in the last Rak'a he pushed
     his left foot forward and kept the other foot
     propped up and sat over the buttocks " 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 792: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina: 

     (he was from the tribe of Uzd Shan'u'a and was
     the ally of the tribe of 'Abdul-Manaf and was one
     of the companions of the Prophet): Once the
     Prophet led us in the Zuhr prayer and stood up
     after the second Rak'a and did not sit down. The
     people stood up with him. When the prayer was
     about to end and the people were waiting for him
     to say the Taslim, he said Takbir while sitting and
     prostrated twice before saying the Taslim and
     then he said the Taslim." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 793: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Malik bin Buhaina: 

     Once Allah's Apostle led us in the Zuhr prayer
     and got up (after the prostrations of the second
     Rak'a) although he should have sat (for the
     Tashah-hud). So at the end of the prayer, he
     prostrated twice while sitting (prostrations of
     Sahu). 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 794: 

     Narrated Shaqlq bin Salama: 

     'Abdullah said, "Whenever we prayed behind the
     Prophet we used to recite (in sitting) 'Peace be
     on Gabriel, Michael, peace be on so and so.
     Once Allah's Apostle looked back at us and
     said, 'Allah Himself is As-Salam (Peace), and if
     anyone of you prays then he should say,
     At-Tahiyatu lil-lahi wassalawatu wat-taiyibatu.
     AsSalamu 'alalika aiyuha-n-Nabiyu wa
     rahmatu-l-lahi wa barakatuhu. As-Salam alaina
     wa ala ibadil-lah is-salihin. (All the compliments,
     prayers and good things are due to Allah: peace
     be on you, O Prophet and Allah's mercy and
     blessings be on you. Peace be on us an on the
     true pious slaves of Allah). (If you say that, it will
     be for all the slaves in the heaven and the earth).
     Ash-hadu an la-ilaha illa-l-lahu wa ash-hadu anna
     Muhammadan 'abduhu wa Rasuluhu. (I testify
     that none has the right to be worshipped but
     Allah and I also testify that Muhammad is His
     slave and His Apostle)." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 795: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle used to
     invoke Allah in the prayer saying "Allahumma inni
     a'udhu bika min adhabil-qabri, wa a'udhu bika
     min fitnatil-masihid-dajjal, wa a'udhu bika min
     fitnatil-mahya wa fitnatil-mamati. Allahumma inni
     a'udhu bika minal-ma thami wal-maghrami. (O
     Allah, I seek refuge with You from the
     punishment of the grave and from the afflictions
     of Masi,h Ad-Dajjal and from the afflictions of
     life and death. O Allah, I seek refuge with You
     from the sins and from being in debt)."
     Somebody said to him, "Why do you so
     frequently seek refuge with Allah from being in
     debt?" The Prophet replied, "A person in debt
     tells lies whenever he speaks, and breaks
     promises whenever he makes (them)." 'Aisha
     also narrated: I heard Allah's Apostle in his
     prayer seeking refuge with Allah from the
     afflictions of Ad-dajjal. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 796: 

     Narrated Abu Bakr As-Siddiq: 

     I asked Allah's Apostle to teach me an
     invocation so that I may invoke Allah with it in
     my prayer. He told me to say, "Allahumma inni
     zalumtu nafsi zulman kathiran, Wala
     yaghfirudhdhunuba illa anta faghfirli maghfiratan
     min 'Indika, war-hamni innaka
     antal-ghafururrahim (O Allah! I have done great
     injustice to myself and none except You forgives
     sins, so please forgive me and be Merciful to me
     as You are the Forgiver, the Merciful)." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 797: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     When we prayed with the Prophet we used to
     say, "Peace be on Allah from His slaves and
     peace be on so and so." The Prophet said,
     "Don't say As-Salam be on Allah, for He Himself
     is As-Salam, but say, 'At-tahiyatu lil-lahi
     was-salawatu wat-taiyibatu. As-salamu 'Alaika
     aiyuhan-Nabiyu warahmatu-l-lahi wa
     barakatuhu. As-salamu 'alaina wa 'ala
     ibadillahis-salihin. (If you say this then it will be
     for all the slaves in heaven or between heaven
     and earth). Ashhadu an la-ilaha illallahu wa
     ashhadu anna Muhammadan 'Abduhu wa
     Rasuluhu.' Then select the invocation you like
     best and recite it." (See Hadith No. 794, 795 &
     796). 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 798: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     I saw Allah's Apostle prostrating in mud and
     water and saw the mark of mud on his forehead. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 799: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle finished his prayers
     with Taslim, the women would get up and he
     would stay on for a while in his place before
     getting up. Ibn Shihab said, "I think (and Allah
     knows better), that the purpose of his stay was
     that the women might leave before the men who
     had finished their prayer. " 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 800: 

     Narrated 'Itban bin Malik: 

     We prayed with the Prophet and used to finish
     our prayer with the Taslim along with him. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 801: 

     Narrated Mahmud bin Ar-Rabi': 

     I remember Allah's Apostle and also the mouthful
     of water which he took from a bucket in our
     house and ejected (on me). I heard from ltban
     bin Malik Al-Ansari, who was one from Bani
     Salim, saying, "I used to lead my tribe of Bani
     Salim in prayer. Once I went to the Prophet and
     said to him, 'I have weak eye-sight and at times
     the rainwater flood intervenes between me and
     the mosque of my tribe and I wish that you
     would come to my house and pray at some place
     so that I could take that place as a place for
     praying (mosque). He said, "Allah willing, I shall
     do that." Next day Allah's Apostle along with
     Abu Bakr, came to my house after the sun had
     risen high and he asked permission to enter. I
     gave him permission, but he didn't sit till he said
     to me, "Where do you want me to pray in your
     house?" I pointed to a place in the house where I
     wanted him to pray. So he stood up for the
     prayer and we aligned behind him. He completed
     the prayer with Taslim and we did the same
     simultaneously." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 802: 

     Narrated Abu Ma'bad: 

     (the freed slave of Ibn 'Abbas) Ibn 'Abbas told
     me, "In the lifetime of the Prophet it was the
     custom to celebrate Allah's praises aloud after
     the compulsory congregational prayers." Ibn
     'Abbas further said, "When I heard the Dhikr, I
     would learn that the compulsory congregational
     prayer had ended." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 803: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     I used to recognize the completion of the prayer
     of the Prophet by hearing Takbir. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 804: 

     Narrated Abu Huraira: 

     Some poor people came to the Prophet and
     said, "The wealthy people will get higher grades
     and will have permanent enjoyment and they
     pray like us and fast as we do. They have more
     money by which they perform the Hajj, and
     'Umra; fight and struggle in Allah's Cause and
     give in charity." The Prophet said, "Shall I not tell
     you a thing upon which if you acted you would
     catch up with those who have surpassed you?
     Nobody would overtake you and you would be
     better than the people amongst whom you live
     except those who would do the same. Say
     "Sub-han-al-lah", "Alhamdu-lillah" and "Allahu
     Akbar" thirty three times each after every
     (compulsory) prayer." We differed and some of
     us said that we should say, "Subhan-al-lah" thirty
     three times and "Alhamdu lillah" thirty three times
     and "Allahu Akbar" thirty four times. I went to
     the Prophet who said, "Say, "Subhan-al-lah" and
     "Alhamdu lillah" and "Allahu Akbar" all together
     for thirty three times." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 805: 

     Narrated Warrad: 

     (the clerk of Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba) Once
     Al-Mughira dictated to me in a letter addressed
     to Mu'awiya that the Prophet used to say after
     every compulsory prayer, "La ilaha ilallah
     wahdahu la sharika lahu, lahul-mulku
     wa-lahul-hamdu, wahuwa ala kulli shai in qadir.
     Allahumma la mani 'a lima a'taita, wa la mu'tiya
     lima mana'ta, wa la yanfa'u dhal-jaddi
     minka-l-jadd. (None has the right to be
     worshipped but Allah and He has no partner in
     Lordship or in worship or in the Names and the
     Qualities, and for Him is the Kingdom and all the
     praises are for Him and He is omnipotent. O
     Allah! Nobody can hold back what you give and
     nobody can give what You hold back. Hard
     (efforts by anyone for anything cannot benefit
     one against Your Will)." And Al-Hasan said,
     "Al-jadd' means prosperity." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 806: 

     Narrated Samura bin Jundab: 

     The Prophet used to face us on completion of the
     prayer. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 807: 

     Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani: 

     The Prophet led us in the Fajr prayer at
     Hudaibiya after a rainy night. On completion of
     the prayer, he faced the people and said, "Do
     you know what your Lord has said (revealed)?"
     The people replied, "Allah and His Apostle know
     better." He said, "Allah has said, 'In this morning
     some of my slaves remained as true believers and
     some became non-believers; whoever said that
     the rain was due to the Blessings and the Mercy
     of Allah had belief in Me and he disbelieves in
     the stars, and whoever said that it rained because
     of a particular star had no belief in Me but
     believes in that star.' " 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 808: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     Once the Prophet delayed the 'Isha' prayer until
     midnight and then came to us. Having prayed he
     faced us and said, "The people had prayed and
     slept but you were in the prayer as long as you
     were waiting for it." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 809: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     "The Prophet after finishing the prayer with
     Taslim used to stay at his place for a while." Ibn
     Shihab said, "I think (and Allah knows better),
     that he used to wait for the departure of the
     women who had prayed." Ibn Shihab wrote that
     he had heard it from Hind bint Al-Harith
     Al-Firasiya from Um Salama, the wife of the
     Prophet (Hind was from the companions of Um
     Salama) who said, "When the Prophet finished
     the prayer with Taslim, the women would depart
     and enter their houses before Allah's Apostle
     departed." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 810: 

     Narrated 'Uqba: 

     I offered the 'Asr prayer behind the Prophet at
     Medina. When he had finished the prayer with
     Taslim, he got up hurriedly and went out by
     crossing the rows of the people to one of the
     dwellings of his wives. The people got scared at
     his speed . The Prophet came back and found
     the people surprised at his haste and said to
     them, "I remembered a piece of gold Lying in my
     house and I did not like it to divert my attention
     from Allah's worship, so I have ordered it to be
     distributed (in charity)." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 811: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah: 

     You should not give away a part of your prayer
     to Satan by thinking that it is necessary to depart
     (after finishing the prayer) from one's right side
     only; I have seen the Prophet often leave from
     the left side. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 812: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     During the holy battle of Khaibar the Prophet
     said, "Whoever ate from this plant (i.e. garlic)
     should not enter our mosque." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 813: 

     Narrated 'Ata': 

     I heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, "The Prophet
     said, 'Whoever eats (from) this plant (he meant
     garlic) should keep away from our mosque." I
     said, "What does he mean by that?" He replied,
     "I think he means only raw garlic." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 814: 

     Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah: 

     The Prophet said, "Whoever eats garlic or onion
     should keep away from our mosque or should
     remain in his house." (Jabir bin 'Abdullah, in
     another narration said, "Once a big pot
     containing cooked vegetables was brought. On
     finding unpleasant smell coming from it, the
     Prophet asked, 'What is in it?' He was told all the
     names of the vegetables that were in it. The
     Prophet ordered that it should be brought near to
     some of his companions who were with him.
     When the Prophet saw it he disliked to eat it and
     said, 'Eat. (I don't eat) for I converse with those
     whom you don't converse with (i.e. the angels)." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 815: 

     Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz: 

     A man asked Anas, "What did you hear from the
     Prophet about garlic?" He said, "The Prophet
     said, 'Whoever has eaten this plant should neither
     come near us nor pray with us." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 816: 

     Narrated Sulaiman Ash-Shaibam: 

     I heard Ash-Sha'bi saying, "A person who was
     accompanying the Prophet passed by a grave
     that was separated from the other graves told me
     that the Prophet once led the people in the
     (funeral) prayer and the people had aligned
     behind him. I said, "O Aba 'Amr! Who told you
     about it?" He said, "Ibn Abbas." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 817: 

     Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri: 

     The Prophet said, "Ghusl (taking a bath) on
     Friday is compulsory for every Muslim reaching
     the age of puberty." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 818: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     One night I slept at the house of my aunt
     Maimuna and the Prophet slept (too). He got up
     (for prayer) in the last hours of the night and
     performed a light ablution from a hanging leather
     skin. ('Amr, the sub-narrator described that the
     ablution was very light). Then he stood up for
     prayer and I got up too and performed the
     ablution in the same way and joined him on his
     left side. He pulled me to the right and prayed as
     much as Allah will. Then he lay down and slept
     and I heard his breath sounds till the
     Mu'adh-dhin came to him to inform him about
     the (Fajr) prayer. He left with him for the prayer
     and prayed without repeating the ablution.
     (Sufyan the subnarrator said: We said to 'Amr,
     "Some people say, 'The eyes of the Prophet
     sleep but his heart never sleeps.' " 'Amr said,
     "'Ubai bin 'Umar said, 'The dreams of the
     Prophets are Divine Inspirations. Then he
     recited, '(O my son), I have seen in dream that I
     was slaughtering you (offering you in sacrifice).")
     (37.102) 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 819: 

     Narrated Anas bin Malik: 

     My grandmother Mulaika invited Allah's Apostle
     for a meal which she had prepared specially for
     him. He ate some of it and said, "Get up. I shall
     lead you in the prayer." I brought a mat that had
     become black owing to excessive use and I
     sprinkled water on it. Allah's Apostle stood on it
     and prayed two Rakat; and the orphan was with
     me (in the first row), and the old lady stood
     behind us. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 820: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: 

     Once I came riding a she-ass and I, then, had
     just attained the age of puberty. Allah's Apostle
     was leading the people in prayer at Mina facing
     no wall. I passed in front of the row and let loose
     the she-ass for grazing and joined the row and no
     one objected to my deed. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 821: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Once Allah's Apostle delayed the 'Isha' prayer till
     'Umar informed him that the women and children
     had slept. Then Allah's Apostle came out and
     said: "None from amongst the dwellers of earth
     have prayed this prayer except you." In those
     days none but the people of Medina prayed. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 822: 

     Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Abis: 

     A person asked Ibn Abbas, "Have you ever
     presented yourself at the ('Id) prayer with Allah's
     Apostle?" He replied, "Yes." And had it not been
     for my kinship (position) with the Prophet it
     would not have been possible for me to do so
     (for he was too young). The Prophet went to the
     mark near the house of Kathir bin As-Salt and
     delivered a sermon. He then went towards the
     women. He advised and reminded them and
     asked them to give alms. So the woman would
     bring her hand near her neck and take off her
     necklace and put it in the garment of Bilal. Then
     the Prophet and Bilal came to the house." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 823: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Once Allah's Apostle delayed the 'Isha' prayer till
     'Umar informed him that the women and children
     had slept. The Prophet came out and said,
     "None except you from amongst the dwellers of
     earth is waiting for this prayer." In those days,
     there was no prayer except in Medina and they
     used to pray the 'Isha' prayer between the
     disappearance of the twilight and the first third of
     the night. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 824: 

     Narrated Ibn 'Umar: 

     The Prophet said, "If your women ask
     permission to go to the mosque at night, allow
     them." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 825: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     (the wife of the Prophet) In the lifetime of Allah's
     Apostle the women used to get up when they
     finished their compulsory prayers with Taslim.
     The Prophet and the men would stay on at their
     places as long as Allah will. When the Prophet
     got up, the men would then get up. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 826: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     When Allah's Apostle finished the Fajr prayer,
     the women would leave covered in their sheets
     and were not recognized owing to the darkness. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 827: 

     Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada Al-Ansari: 

     My father said, "Allah's Apostle said, "Whenever
     I stand for prayer, I want to prolong it but on
     hearing the cries of a child, I would shorten it as I
     dislike to put its mother in trouble." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 828: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Had Allah's Apostle known what the women
     were doing, he would have forbidden them from
     going to the mosque as the women of Bani Israel
     had been forbidden. Yahya bin Said (a
     sub-narrator) asked 'Amra (another
     sub-narrator), "Were the women of Bani Israel
     forbidden?" She replied "Yes." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 829: 

     Narrated Um Salama: 

     Whenever Allah's Apostle completed the prayer
     with Taslim, the women used to get up
     immediately and Allah's Apostle would remain at
     his place for someone before getting up. (The
     sub-narrator (Az-Zuhri) said, "We think, and
     Allah knows better, that he did so, so that the
     women might leave before men could get in
     touch with them)." 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 830: 

     Narrated Anas: 

     The Prophet prayed in the house of Um Sulaim;
     and I, along with an orphan stood behind him
     while Um Sulaim (stood) behind us. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 831: 

     Narrated 'Aisha: 

     Allah's Apostle used to offer the Fajr prayer
     when it was still dark and the believing women
     used to return (after finishing their prayer) and
     nobody could recognize them owing to darkness,
     or they could not recognize one another. 


Volume 1, Book 12, Number 832: 

     Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah: 

     My father said, "The Prophet said, 'If the wife of
     any one of you asks permission (to go to the
     mosque) do not forbid her." 




