THE CHAPTER OF Q
(L. Mecca.)
IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God. QAF. By the glorious Koran! nay, they wonder that there has come to them a warner from amongst themselves; and the misbelievers say, 'This is a wondrous thing! What, when we are dead and have become dust?-that is a remote return!'
We well know what the earth consumes of them, for with us is a book that keeps (account).
Nay, they call the truth a lie when it comes to them, and they are in a confused affair.
Do not they behold the heaven above them, how we have built it and adorned it, and how it has no flaws?
And the earth, we have stretched it out and thrown thereon firm mountains, and caused to grow thereon every beautiful kind. An insight and a reminder to every servant who repents! And we sent down from the heaven water as a blessing, and caused to grow therewith gardens and the harvest grain! And the tall palm trees having piled up spathes, for a provision to (our) servants; and we quickened thereby a dead land; thus shall the resurrection be!
Before them the people of Noah and the fellows of ar Rass and Thamud and 'Ad and Pharaoh called the apostles liars; and the brethren of Lot and the fellows of the Grove and the people of Tubba'h all called the prophets liars, and the threat was duly executed. Were we then fatigued with the first creation? nay! but they are in obscurity concerning the new creation.
But we created man, and we know what his soul whispers; for we are nigher to him than his jugular vein!
When the two meeters meet, sitting the one on the right and the other on the left, not a word does he utter, but a watcher is by him ready!
And the agony of death shall come in truth!-'that is what thou didst shun!'
And the trumpet shall be blown!-that is the threatened day!
And every soul shall come-with it a driver and a witness! 'Thou wert heedless of this, and we withdrew thy veil from thee, and to-day is thine eyesight keen!'
And his mate shall say, 'This is what is ready for me (to attest). 'Throw into hell every stubborn misbeliever!-who forbids good, a transgressor, a doubter! who sets other gods with God-and throw him, ye twain, into fierce torment!'
His mate shall say, 'Our Lord! I seduced him not, but he was in a remote error.'
He shall say, 'Wrangle not before me; for I sent the threat to you before. The sentence is not changed with me, nor am I unjust to my servants.'
On the day we will say to hell, 'Art thou full? and it will say, 'Are there any more?'
And Paradise shall be brought near to the pious,-not far off. This is what ye are promised, to every one who turns frequently (to God) and keeps His commandments: who fears the Merciful in secret and brings a repentant heart.
'Enter into it in peace: this is the day of eternity!'
They shall have what they wish therein, and increase from us! How many a generation have we destroyed before them, mightier than they in prowess!
Pass through the land, is there any refuge? Verily, in that is a reminder to whomsoever has a heart, or gives ear, and is a witness thereto.
We did create the heavens and the earth and what is between the two in six days, and no weariness touched us.
Be thou patient then of what they say, and celebrate the praises of thy Lord before the rising of the sun and before the setting. And through (some) of the night celebrate His praise and the additional adorations.
And listen for the day when the crier shall cry from a near place;-the day when they shall hear the shout in truth-that is the day of coming forth!
Verily, we quicken and we kill, and unto us the journey is! On the day when the earth shall be cleft asunder from them swiftly;-that is a gathering together which is easy to us! We know what they say; nor art thou over them one to compel.
Wherefore remind, by the Koran, him who fears the threat.
